Approval of long-awaited EPA brownfield cleanup funds 'a key turning point' for Waukegan's south lakefront
By JIM NEWTON
NEWS-SUN |
JUN 07, 2019 AT 5:50 AM

An 11-acre parcel along Waukegan's south lakefront, seen here from Oakwood Cemetary on Sheridan Road, has been approved for environmental cleanup, which officials hope will clear the way for residential development.
An 11-acre parcel along Waukegan's south lakefront, seen here from Oakwood Cemetary on Sheridan Road, has been approved for environmental cleanup, which officials hope will clear the way for residential development. (Dan Moran/News-Sun)
A contaminated area along Waukegan’s south lakefront will be cleaned up with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency grant funding the city has sought for years, authorities announced Thursday.

Once the hazardous materials have been cleared from the site, Waukegan officials plan to move forward with a residential development project they hope will finally spark a turnaround for the city’s lakefront.

“This is huge for us,” Waukegan Mayor Sam Cunningham said Thursday. “We’re extremely excited.”

U.S. Rep Brad Schneider, D-Deerfield, and Cunningham announced the award of a $400,000 grant from the EPA to clean up the 11-acre former Fansteel site at 801 S. Market St., which extends to the North Chicago border.

The property was used for industrial operations until 1987, and was contaminated with chloroform, heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and PCBs, according to a release announcing the grant.

It was purchased by a developer in 2004 and entered into the State of Illinois Voluntary Site Remediation Program, but remains vacant and only partially cleaned up since work was halted in 2009 for financial reasons.

“I am thrilled to share the news of this EPA grant to help clean up a valuable piece of lakefront property in Waukegan that has sat vacant and contaminated for too long,” Schneider said in the release.

“I congratulate the City of Waukegan for their selection for this competitive grant, and look forward to supporting the efforts of Mayor Cunningham and other community leaders to restore and redevelop this former industrial site.”

Cunningham said the planned cleanup opens the door for the city to begin working with Canadian National Railroad for the removal of just over three miles of old, unused railroad tracks along the shoreline that have been referred to as being “squarely within the footprint” of Waukegan’s planned redevelopment area.

“I am excited by what this announcement and what this grant means for Waukegan,” Cunningham said in the joint statement with Schneider. “This will allow for the final cleanup of a long-vacant and contaminated industrial site, opening it up for future redevelopment opportunities on our lakefront.

“This investment is a key turning point for this property,” Cunningham added, “and I believe that it will be a huge catalyst that will help to further our goal of making Waukegan the primary destination for arts, culture and recreation in Northern Illinois.”

The competitive grant was awarded through the EPA’s Brownfields Program, which empowers states, communities and other stakeholders to work together to assess, safely clean up and sustainably reuse brownfields, which the statement described as properties “whose use may be complicated by the presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant.”

Gary Deigan, an environmental consultant who has been working with Waukegan on efforts to prepare the former Fansteel machine-tool plant site for residential redevelopment, said in a 2016 report to the city that industrial use of the land dates to the 1890s.

Former operations at the site included the U.S. Sugar and U.S. Starch Works refineries around the turn of the century,. By the 1930s and '40s, Fansteel and the Vanadium Alloys Steel Co. established a metal-fabricating operation that remained active until what was known as the Fansteel VR/Wesson plant closed in early 1987.

Deigan, who according to Cunningham is still working with the city on the cleanup project, said in the 2016 report that, “the intended reuse plan for the subject property, as described in the 2003 Waukegan Master Plan, is to turn the former industrial property into residential neighborhoods, possibly including condominiums, row homes, single-family homes, open space and a parking structure.”

Ownership of the parcel was transferred to the city in December 2014 from Southlake Investments.

That private development group spent a reported $1.2 million on cleaning up the soil from 2004 through 2009, when the collapse of the housing market halted plans to redevelop the property with a mix of condominiums, single-family homes and retail space.

Toxic nonstick pan 'forever chemicals' contaminate some meat, fish, chocolate cake, FDA testing finds
By ELLEN KNICKMEYER and JOHN FLESHER AND MICHAEL CASEY
ASSOCIATED PRESS |
JUN 03, 2019 AT 2:55 PM

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is seen Aug. 2, 2018, behind FDA logos at a bus stop in Silver Spring, Md. The FDA’s first broad testing of food for a class of industrial compounds found high levels in some meats and seafood, according to findings presented at a conference.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is seen Aug. 2, 2018, behind FDA logos at a bus stop in Silver Spring, Md. The FDA’s first broad testing of food for a class of industrial compounds found high levels in some meats and seafood, according to findings presented at a conference. (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
WASHINGTON — The Food and Drug Administration found substantial levels of a worrisome class of nonstick, stain-resistant industrial compounds in some grocery store meats and seafood and in off-the-shelf chocolate cake, according to FDA researchers.

The FDA's food-test results are likely to heighten complaints by states and public health groups that President Donald Trump's administration is not acting fast enough or firmly enough to start regulating the manmade compounds.

A federal toxicology report last year cited links between high levels of the compounds in peoples' blood and health problems, but said it was not certain the nonstick compounds were the cause.

The levels in nearly half of the meat and fish tested were two or more times over the only currently existing federal advisory level for any kind of the widely used manmade compounds, which are called per- and polyfluoroalykyl substances, or PFAS.

The level in the chocolate cake was higher: more than 250 times the only federal guidelines, which are for some PFAS in drinking water.

Food and Drug Administration spokeswoman Tara Rabin said Monday that the agency thought the contamination was "not likely to be a human health concern," even though the tests exceeded the sole existing federal PFAS recommendations for drinking water.

As a handful of PFAS contaminations of food emerge around the country, authorities have deemed some a health concern but not others. The agency considers each discovery of the compound in food case by case, including the kind of food, levels of contamination, frequency of consumption and latest scientific information, Rabin said.

There are nearly 5,000 varieties of PFAS, which DuPont created in 1938 and first put into use for nonstick cookware. Industries use them in countless consumer items — food packaging, carpets and couches, dental floss and outdoor gear — to repeal grease, water and stains.

The chemicals also are found in firefighting foam, which the Defense department calls irreplaceable in suppressing jet-fuel fires. Especially around military bases and PFAS facilities, decades of use have built up levels in water, soil and some treated sewage sludge used to fertilize non-organic food crops and feed for livestock.

They've been a topic of congressional hearings, state legislation and intense federal and state scrutiny over the past two years.

Last year's federal toxicology review concluded the compounds are more dangerous than previously thought, saying consistent studies of exposed people "suggest associations" with some kinds of cancers, liver problems, low birth weight and other issues.

The compounds have been dubbed "forever chemicals" because they take thousands of years to degrade, and because some accumulate in people's bodies.

The Environmental Protection Agency earlier established a nonbinding health threshold of 70 parts per trillion for two-phased out forms of the contaminant in drinking water.

The EPA has said it would consider setting mandatory limits instead after the toxicology report and after federally mandated PFAS testing of water systems found contamination. The administration has called dealing with PFAS a "potential public relations nightmare" and a "national priority."

"I know there are people who would like us to move faster" on PFAS, EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler said Monday at the National Press Club. "We are addressing this much faster than the agency has ever done for a chemical like this."

Impatient for federal action, several states have moved to regulate the chemicals on their own, including setting standards for groundwater or drinking water.

The FDA study sampled market-basket items bought in three, undisclosed mid-Atlantic cities in 2017, testing for PFAS.

PFOS — already phased out of production in the U.S. as a health concern — turned up at levels ranging from 134 parts per trillion to 865 parts per trillion in tilapia, chicken, turkey, beef, cod, salmon, shrimp, lamb, catfish and hot dogs. Chocolate cake tested at 17,640 parts per trillion of a kind of PFAS called PFPeA.

The FDA presentation also disclosed PFAS findings — one spiking over 1,000 parts per trillion — in leafy green vegetables grown within 10 miles (16 kilometers) of an unspecified eastern U.S. PFAS plant and sold at a farmer's market.

And it previewed test levels for a previously reported instance of PFAS contamination of the food supply in the feed and milk at a dairy near an Air Force base in New Mexico. The FDA called the milk contamination a health concern.

In New York village, a trail of cancer leads to tap water
NATION & WORLD
In New York village, a trail of cancer leads to tap water

JAN 26, 2016 AT 12:07 AM
FDA researchers discussed the results at a conference by the Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry last week in Finland. The Environmental Defense Fund and the Environmental Working Group obtained the FDA presentation and provided it to The Associated Press.

"What this calls for is additional research to determine how widespread this contamination is and how high the levels are," said Linda Birnbaum, director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, in an interview. "We have to look at total human exposure — not just what's in the water or what's in the food ... or not just dust. We need to look at the sum totals of what the exposures are."

"Drinking one glass of contaminated water is unlikely to be associated with health risks, as is eating one slice of contaminated chocolate cake," said Jamie DeWitt, a toxicologist at East Carolina University who studies PFAS. "Individually, each item is unlikely to be a huge problem, but collectively and over a lifetime, that may be a different story."
