Trump EPA guts tough standards for toxic metals dumped into US waterways by coal-fired power plants, including biggest polluter on Lake Michigan
By MICHAEL HAWTHORNE
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
SEP 09, 2020 AT 5:01 AM

Towering above Lake Michigan north of the Wisconsin border, the Oak Creek coal-fired power plant is one of the largest sources of toxic metals dumped into American waterways.

Only six other power plants nationwide released more arsenic, lead, mercury and other metals into lakes and rivers last year, according to a Chicago Tribune analysis of federal records. On the shores of Lake Michigan, no other polluter comes close.



By now the coal plant’s owner should have dramatically reduced its pollution. In 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency adopted stringent limits on metals that stick around in the environment and become more dangerous as they move up the food chain.

But President Donald Trump’s political appointees stalled the regulations soon after taking office in 2017, and last week they gutted the Obama-era standards for Oak Creek and other fossil fuel plants. The Trump EPA’s alternative fails to require the most effective treatment methods, pushes back deadlines and exempts many power plants from doing anything at all.

Buried in the fine print of the Republican administration’s new regulations is a stunning admission: Benefits for energy companies would come at the expense of more than 20 million Americans who drink water and eat fish from lakes and rivers polluted by coal plant discharges.

Low-income Black and Latino communities face disproportionate risks from the pollution, the Trump EPA also acknowledges in its regulatory documents.

“There is just no way anyone can justify that trade-off,” said Betsy Southerland, who led an EPA team that drafted the Obama-era rule and became a vocal critic of the agency after retiring in 2017.



Weaker regulation of power plant wastewater is one of several environmental rollbacks drafted by Trump appointees who formerly worked in the coal industry, a once-dominant source of electricity in steep decline.

As recently as a decade ago, coal accounted for more than half of all electricity generated in the United States. This year its share is expected to drop to just 18% as power companies spurn the fossil fuel in favor of cleaner, less-expensive natural gas and renewable energy, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.

The rapid shift is driving coal companies into bankruptcy, prompting scores of layoffs at coal mines and shaving billions from the balance sheets of coal plant owners.

Industry lobbyists and Trump administration officials blame the Obama EPA for job losses at coal mines and power plants struggling to compete in energy markets. The Utility Water Act Group, an industry trade organization, said the former administration’s wastewater regulations failed “to consider accurately the cumulative costs of EPA’s major rules affecting the utility industry, the coal industry and the communities depending on them.”

Documents filed by the Trump EPA estimate its new regulations will save the industry $140 million and slow the move away from coal-fired electricity.

“Newer, more affordable pollution control technologies and flexibility on the regulation’s phase-in will reduce pollution and save jobs at the same time,” said EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler, a former lobbyist for Murray Energy, one of the coal companies that pushed for the rollback.

The purported reductions in pollution could be a mirage, though. Wheeler and other Trump administration officials grounded their regulations on the assumption that investor-owned companies will volunteer to spend millions of dollars upgrading coal plants.

Along with other pollutants, metals are concentrated in ash left behind from the burning of coal and in residue from scrubbers that reduce air pollution. Power plants generally mix the waste with water and store the slurry in open pits that are gradually emptied into lakes and rivers.

Many of the pits also leach into groundwater tied to underground aquifers. Nationwide, more than 90% of the sites storing coal ash violate EPA health standards, according to a review of industry records by the nonprofit Environmental Integrity Project.

The Obama EPA’s regulations targeted arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury and selenium — metals that when ingested through water or food can cause cancer, lower the IQ of children and trigger organ damage and reproductive problems.

Despite dozens of coal plants closing or converting to natural gas during the past three years, the industry is still responsible for about a third of the metals-laden pollution released into water nationally — more than any economic sector.

Indiana led all states with 16,527 pounds of the six metals discharged by coal plants last year, according to industry records filed with the EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory.

Others in the top five are Texas (7,255 pounds), Michigan (6,348 pounds), Ohio (5,179 pounds) and Georgia (4,901 pounds). Illinois coal plants released 618 pounds during the year.

The 2,165 pounds dumped into Lake Michigan by the Oak Creek coal plant accounted for nearly two-thirds of all discharges into Wisconsin waterways last year, the Tribune analysis found.

During the past decade, the amount of mercury pollution from Oak Creek has steadily increased. Wisconsin officials last year cleared We Energies, the plant’s owner, to release concentrations of the brain-damaging metal nearly three times greater than state law allows.

Brendan Conway, a company spokesman, said permits for Oak Creek include deadlines for improvements required under the Obama-era regulations.

“We are evaluating how this new rule might change additional wastewater treatment technologies we are designing,” Conway said in an email. “However, we believe we are well positioned to meet many of the new … requirements with existing environmental control technologies.”

Eliminating the pollution costs substantially less than it did when the Obama EPA adopted its regulations five years ago, the Trump EPA acknowledges. But Wheeler and his aides chose to require less effective technology that will leave millions of Americans at risk from harmful metals and chemical pollutants, according to complex charts scattered throughout regulatory documents.

Power companies are exempt from even the less stringent requirements at coal plants scheduled to close by 2028.

“They had an opportunity here to protect people at a fraction of the costs we estimated,” said Southerland, the former EPA official. “They just chose not to do so.”

While the Trump administration’s changes will be challenged in court, several power companies already have indefinitely delayed projects intended to comply with the Obama-era regulations.

Northern Indiana Public Service Co. had sought approval from state regulators to charge ratepayers $170 million for wastewater treatment at its Schahfer Generating Station in Jasper County. The company put its project on hold and later announced it will close the coal plant by 2023 as part of a transition to wind and solar power.

Thom Cmar, a lawyer for the nonprofit group EarthJustice, said loopholes in the Trump EPA regulations are intended to benefit a few dozen other coal plants.

“They’re propping up a dying industry, “ Cmar said. “But this pollution should have been eliminated a long time ago.”

Three federal judges — two appointed by Trump and another by President George W. Bush — agree government and industry have taken too long to address the threats to public health and the environment.

In an April 2019 decision, the 5th District Court of Appeals judges chided the EPA for allowing energy companies to continue storing waste in leaky pits. The judges noted the agency’s wastewater standards for power plants hadn’t been updated since 1982, “the second year of President Reagan’s first term, the same year that saw the release of the first CD player, the Sony Watchman pocket television, and the Commodore 64 home computer.”

Chicago announces plan to start replacing lead water pipes after decades of denying the dangers
By MICHAEL HAWTHORNE
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
SEP 10, 2020 AT 5:00 AM

Chicago, the last big American city to require water pipes made of brain-damaging lead, is now the last one beginning to rip toxic pipes out of the ground.

Under plans shared Wednesday with the Chicago Tribune, the Department of Water Management envisions a long and costly effort to protect Chicagoans from a widespread public health threat that remained largely hidden for decades.


Initial work will be modest compared with the scope of the dangers. Next year the city estimates it will replace only 750 of the roughly 400,000 lead service lines connecting homes to street mains, according to slides prepared by the water department.

Yet the new program from Mayor Lori Lightfoot’s administration is the latest example of a shifting mindset at City Hall, where mayors and aldermen resisted changes to Chicago’s plumbing code until Congress outlawed lead water pipes in 1986.
Former city officials — up to and including Mayor Rahm Emanuel — also denied for years that anyone could be harmed just by drawing a glass of water from their household faucet.

“It’s great that Mayor Lightfoot has done what none of her predecessors had the courage to do, which is to acknowledge the problem,” said Miguel del Toral, a retired U.S. Environmental Protection Agency official who played a key role in identifying similar threats in Flint, Michigan, and East Chicago, Indiana.


Chicago by far has more lead service lines than any other city. Detroit, with the second most, has about 125,000.

Ingesting tiny concentrations of the metal can permanently damage the developing brains of children and contribute to heart disease, kidney failure and other health problems later in life. In 2018, researchers estimated more than 400,000 deaths a year in the U.S. are linked to lead exposure.

Like other cities that already are replacing lead service lines, Chicago will rely on federal grants and low-interest loans to finance its work.

Most of the $19 million earmarked for next year will be spent in low-income neighborhoods where children also are endangered by dust from lead-based paint — still the largest source of exposure. The water service line will be replaced in 600 homes with high lead levels, some of which were identified through free testing kits distributed by the city.

To assess what likely will become a routine construction project, the Lightfoot administration will separately pick one city block where every lead service line is replaced while crews dig up the street to install a new water main.

“We know there will be some things we need to do differently in Chicago than they have done in other cities," Andrea Cheng, an assistant water commissioner, said in an interview. “We need to work on our coordination with other utilities. We are going to need a lot of public outreach. Learning how it all works on this one block will inform our bigger program in the future."

Coordinating the replacement of service lines and water mains would make the work more cost-effective. It also would end a city practice that likely exposed Chicagoans to high levels of lead in their tap water during the past decade.

Studies by del Toral and others have found that when service lines are jostled by street work or plumbing repairs, spikes of lead can intermittently flow out of household taps for weeks or months afterward.

The city dug up scores of streets under Emanuel as the former mayor sped up the replacement of aging, often-leaky water mains. City workers also installed dozens of meters to conserve the considerable-but-limited supply of water Chicago is allowed to draw from Lake Michigan — work that Lightfoot paused last year after the city confirmed it triggered high lead levels.

Emanuel secured more than $475 million in low-interest loans for the projects and doubled water rates to pay off the debt. But Emanuel — and until recently Lightfoot — didn’t apply for money to replace lead service lines.

Even now, city crews are attaching old, toxic pipes to new water mains before filling in trenches and repaving streets. Lightfoot’s new plan does not address what should be done on streets where the water main already has been replaced.

Others have suggested requiring service line replacement when a property is sold. Some cities loan residents money at low or zero interest to replace their service line, with payments invested to finance new projects.

“This problem is only going to be solved by everyone chipping in,” del Toral said. “I think most fair-minded people would agree.”

For homeowners willing and able to pay for a new service line, Lightfoot is asking City Council to waive costly permit fees.

There is no federal standard for the amount of lead in tap water from individual homes. Utilities are considered to be in compliance with EPA regulations as long as 90% of the homes tested have lead levels below 15 parts per billion, a standard the EPA set nearly three decades ago because the agency thought it could be met with corrosion-inhibiting chemicals.

Chicago conducts this type of testing in just 50 homes every three years — the minimum required. Most are owned by water department employees or retirees living on the Far Northwest and Far Southwest sides, where cases of lead poisoning are rare.

By contrast, results from the city’s free testing kits show lead-contaminated water has been found in at least one home in all 77 community areas.