Decades-old dredging project resumes in East Chicago: Environmentalist says ‘we did not want this permit’
By MEREDITH COLIAS-PETE
POST-TRIBUNE |
OCT 09, 2020 AT 4:11 PM

Debris is cleared from a barge with an excavator as dredging is performed on the Indiana Harbor shipping canal on Friday, October 9, 2020.
Debris is cleared from a barge with an excavator as dredging is performed on the Indiana Harbor shipping canal on Friday, October 9, 2020. (Kyle Telechan / Post-Tribune)
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers recently resumed dredging at the Indiana Harbor and Shipping Canal in East Chicago.

Ohio-based contractor Kokosing Construction Co. and Illinois-based O’Brien and Gere plan to dredge about 150,000 to 200,000 cubic yards this fall, according to the Army Corps.

“The navigation project consists of a harbor channel ranging in depth from 27 to 29 feet low water datum, and two canals with depths of 22 feet,” according to a release. Since 2012, more than 1.58 million cubic yards of sediment has been removed from the canal, both for more efficient commercial navigation and to stop contaminated sediment from going into Lake Michigan, the release said. Dredging at the Harbor Canal first began in 1972.

“By next year, a majority of the federal channel will be dredged to congressionally-authorized navigation depths, including the removal of sediments in adjacent berthing and docking areas, at a nonfederal expense,” U.S. Army Corps spokeswoman Vanessa Villarreal said in a release.

In 2014, the Army Corps applied for a permit that would allow the disposal of toxic sediment from the canal containing PCBs into its confined disposal facility (CDF) in East Chicago, 3500 Indianapolis Blvd. At that time, the corps was not allowed to dredge the most toxic locations in the canal because it didn’t have the authorization to store the dredged material at the facility in East Chicago.

East Chicago residents, environmental activists and university researchers pushed back against the permit, calling for an alternative disposal site.

The canal and the CDF are located less than 1/2-mile from East Chicago Central High School, adjacent to Tod Park and near an East Chicago fire station.

Thomas Frank, an organizer with the Community Strategy Group, who opposed it, said Friday he hasn’t kept up with dredging this season, partly because of the pandemic.

“During COVID, we’ve been closed off and hidden from the process,” he said, of environment regulation policy changes. “In this case, we had a universal voice that we did not want this permit and to find another solution.”

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Indiana Department of Environmental Management initially delayed approval in 2017 as it examined off-site disposal options. Both agencies eventually approved the permits around December 2018, saying the CDF was “proven, effective and appropriate” for disposing an estimated 4,000 cubic yards of highly toxic sentiment with PCB concentrations above 50 parts per million. After approval, dredging was scheduled to start in 2019.

“EPA determined there was much less PCB-contaminated sediment (approximately 20,000 cubic yards) than (Army Corps) had originally estimated (60,000 cubic yards). A Great Lakes Legacy Act cleanup, however, would require a non-federal project partner to share costs and long-term maintenance responsibilities and EPA was unable to find an appropriate partner that could meet the requirements for the project,” it said.

Buffalo Grove likely to ban use of coal tar sealants: ‘We’d be foolish to continue to allow people to use it’
By BOB GOLDSBOROUGH
PIONEER PRESS |
OCT 13, 2020 AT 7:33 AM


The Buffalo Grove Village Board recently agreed to move forward with creating an ordinance to ban the use and sale of coal tar sealants on roadways, and to try to educate the public about their dangers. For decades, coal tar sealants have been used on asphalt pavements, including roads, parking lots and driveways. 

In recent years, however, studies have shown that such sealants contaminate the environment and increase cancer risks. In response, some communities have banned coal tar sealant use, including Highland Park, Winnetka, Deerfield, South Barrington, Vernon Hills, Riverwoods and Evanston. 


And Buffalo Grove in 2018 ceased using coal tar sealants when undertaking sealcoating of the village’s own asphalt parking lots and bike paths, officials said.

Now, Buffalo Grove has decided to ban such sealant use and sale throughout the village, although it’s not clear if any village retailers currently sell them, according to village officials.  And residents and businesses have an alternative in asphalt-based sealants, which cost roughly the same and last for approximately the same amounts of time but are far less harmful to the environment and people’s health.

At the Oct. 5 Village Board meeting, Buffalo Grove staff proposed either an outright ban on coal tar sealant or simply launching campaign aimed at educating residents and businesses on it.

Trustees favored a new ordinance that encompasses both options.


“We need the educational component, but I also think we need to ban it,” Trustee Eric Smith said.  “I think we need an ordinance.”

At present, Buffalo Grove does not require permits from residents each time that they sealcoat their private driveways.  At the meeting, village staff dismissed the idea of starting to require permits for such work.

However, village officials noted that local paving contractors need to register with Buffalo Grove each year, and as such, any registered contractors doing paving in the village would be required to follow the ban.

“After reading what the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] says about this product, I think we’d be foolish to continue to allow people to use it,” Trustee Joanne Johnson said about coal tar sealants.

Village Engineer Darren Monico said the village does not know what percentage of driveways have been sealcoated with coal tar sealants.

“I assume a large part of them are coal tar,” he said. If passed, the new law would not apply to flat roofs.  Monico told the Village Board that of the 11 north suburban communities that have banned coal tar sealants, none has banned use on roofs. “It is a similar product…(but) I believe in the process (of) how they use it, it doesn’t come off as much,” Monico said.

Although Buffalo Grove does not require permits for sealing residential driveways, the village does mandate permits for businesses that reseal and restripe their parking lots.  As a result, the new law could also bar the use of coal tar sealants.