State senator seeks air quality testing at Lake County plants that emit carcinogens via letter to EPA, resolution
By JIM NEWTON
NEWS-SUN |
FEB 22, 2019 AT 5:55 PM


Joining a chorus of voices demanding air quality testing in Lake County areas near local two plants generating ethylene oxide emissions, state Sen. Melinda Bush on Friday sent a letter Friday to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and introduced a joint resolution in the General Assembly calling for the testing.

The Grayslake Democrat said in a letter to EPA officials that the major gulf between ethylene oxide (EtO) emission self-reporting results from Sterigenics in Willowbrook and subsequent ambient air monitoring by the federal EPA in the area around the company led to it being shut down by order of the Illinois EPA.


“Public health and safety must be the state and federal government’s overriding concern,” Bush said in the letter. “These reports prove it is unwise, and unsafe, to trust emitters of carcinogens to accurately self-report their emissions.

“The USEPA simply must conduct its own air monitoring to protect the public interest,” Bush added.

Bush also said a joint Senate resolution, calling for federal EPA ambient air testing for EtO in Lake County near the Vantage and Medline plants in Gurnee and Waukegan respectively, was filed Friday and expected to be heard by the Senate March 5.


Bush added she believes the resolution will pass both the Senate and House quickly and be forwarded to federal officials in the near future.



While Bush is carrying the resolution in the Senate, state Rep. Joyce Mason, D-Gurnee, will carry it in the House.

Although some resident groups are demanding “independent testing” near the Vantage plant in Gurnee and the Medline plant in Waukegan, Bush and other local officials stressed the need for federal EPA involvement.

“Hopefully, things start to move really fast from here on out,” said Tea Tanaka, a member of the Stop EtO in Lake County organization, which has attended Gurnee and Waukegan municipal meetings asking for testing.

“Things are moving in the right direction,” she said with regard to public involvement and the number of officials becoming involved with the issue. “We think independent testing is paramount (to) getting the EPA out here to do its job.”


But Gurnee Mayor Kristina Kovarik said that the village, which it has spent months researching and meeting with officials at all levels over the EtO issue, does not have the authority to test or regulate emissions, and therefore would not be able to use local tests to mandate changes.

Bush also indicated the EPA is the agency with the ability to most quickly respond to the concerns and questions in Lake County with regard to both what is happening at the plants and, if necessary, what actions will be taken to correct it.

Kovarik added that the village has just updated its ongoing information section on ethylene oxide on the village’s website, and suggested concerned residents visit the site. She said the U.S EPA has also updated a website devoted to the issue at www.epa.gov/il.

At a recent Gurnee Village Board meeting, Larry Mackey, a deputy director of health services with the Lake County Health Department, said that both Vantage and Medline have agreed to voluntarily submit to additional studies by certified experts.

Both companies also agreed to install more emission-control equipment at their plants to reduce EtO output, Mackey said, and that project could be completed by this spring, weather permitting.


In a statement Thursday, Medline said it is in compliance with standards for EtO treatment and emission, but also supported additional studies on the issue.

“We have been actively working with the IEPA to obtain the permit necessary to install additional abatement technology. Medline already has in place two emissions control systems that operate at over 99 percent efficiency — the current EPA requirement for reducing (ethylene oxide) in emissions,” the company said in the statement.

“We agree with the EPA’s statement that more scientific study and analysis is needed to determine the actual point of risk of (ethylene oxide) emissions,” the Medline statement added. “(Medline) is open to ambient air testing around our healthcare sterilization facility, and it’s equally important to get context for (ethylene oxide) levels in other areas where there are no such facilities.”

According to the Medline statement, “past testing in Illinois has shown levels of (ethylene oxide) in areas where no (ethylene oxide) facilities are located. To ensure our community has all the information we need for good decisions, better information is needed about normal levels of (ethylene oxide) in the air today, and we must ensure the testing methods are well understood and validated.”

Vantage representatives also said they are open to ambient air testing in the area, with the same caveat.


“Since the recent concerns arose around (ethylene oxide), we have been working closely with the U.S. and Illinois EPA, and we will continue to coordinate with those agencies to do everything we can to demonstrate our commitment to safety, including air monitoring around our Gurnee facility, whether conducted by us or public health agencies,” Drew Richardson, Gurnee site leader for Vantage, said Friday.

“But it is critically important that such monitoring accurately differentiate between any (ethylene oxide) emissions from Vantage and background (ethylene oxide) that is already present in the environment from other natural and man-made sources, such as car exhaust in highly trafficked areas,” he said.

According to a Vantage official, unlike many facilities using ethylene oxide, the company does not use the chemical as a medical sterilizing agent, using it instead as an additive for some consumer products.

A company spokeswoman said Friday that Vantage uses ethylene oxide to make other ingredients for use in a variety of industries, including food and baking ingredients, personal care and beauty products, textile manufacturing and lubricants. This is done “in a closed, controlled process that limits ethylene oxide emissions,” she said.

Lake County Health Department officials announced Friday they have visited Medline and Vantage to gather information and convey the public’s concerns.

“Along with the Village of Gurnee and City of Waukegan, the Health Department is taking measures to assure air monitoring will occur and has urged the U.S. EPA to conduct a town hall meeting in Lake County,” officials said in a statement. “The Health Department will continue to use all available resources to protect the health of Lake County residents and will continue to share information as it becomes available.”

Libertyville sets in motion $2.7 million upgrade of wastewater treatment plant
By RICK KAMBIC
PIONEER PRESS |
JAN 31, 2019 AT 10:05 AM

Libertyville is accepting bids for an estimated $2.7 million expansion of its wastewater treatment plant, as part of an effort to comply with phosphorus removal requirements.

Village officials released a request for construction bids in late January shortly after trustees hired a construction engineer for more than $131,000. The village will be accepting bids through late March.



The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in 2011 began enforcing a limit on phosphorus in discharged water.

Communities connected to the Des Plaines Watershed, such as Libertyville and Mundelein, were notified of the new regulation in 2015, as part of their regular permit renewal, according an Illinois EPA spokeswoman.


Phosphorus is a natural water nutrient that stimulates growth and is commonly found in fertilizers and other industrial products, according to the EPA's website. But too much of it can create toxic levels for humans and can overpopulate algae that destabilizes waterway ecosystems.


The new EPA limit is one milligram or less of phosphorus per liter of released water. Libertyville’s most recent monthly average was four milligrams per liter, according to a Jan. 22 memo from the public works department.




“It’s good for the health of our residents, but it’s also expensive and it’s another unfunded mandate from the State of Illinois,” Mayor Terry Weppler said.

Libertyville will cover the $2.7 million construction project with money from the Illinois EPA’s Water Pollution Control Revolving Loan Program, according to the public works department. The loan comes with a 1.76 percent interest rate.

“The state is the one that’s requiring us to do all this work, so we’re going to take advantage of what we can,” Weppler said of Libertyville’s eligibility for the state loan.

Libertyville’s permit was supposed to expire in April, but the Illinois EPA granted the village an one-year extension while officials in Libertyville and Mundelein explored whether to consolidate their neighboring plants.

The two treatment plants, which are located along Milwaukee Avenue, collect and treat commercial and household waste, as well as ground water that enters through cracked pipes or old joint storm water connections, before releasing the treated water into the Des Plaines River.

Community leaders from both towns ultimately decided to move forward separately after the consolidation study revealed that a possible merger would cost $6 million more than the price of Libertyville’s upgrade.

The forthcoming expansion to Libertyville’s plant includes a new building for chemical treatment of phosphorus, as well as new pumps and piping to move the water.

Weppler said the project should be completed by April 2020 and without any noticeable disruptions to residents and businesses.

Former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler confirmed to lead the Environmental Protection Agency
BY BRADY DENNIS AND JULIET EILPERIN
WASHINGTON POST |
FEB 28, 2019 AT 4:26 PM


(Jabin Botsford / The Washington Post)
WASHINGTON — The Senate on Thursday approved former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler to head the Environmental Protection Agency by a vote of 52 to 47, elevating a veteran of Washington political and industry circles who has advanced President Donald Trump's push to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations.

Wheeler, who began his career at the EPA during the 1990s and spent years on Capitol Hill before heading to the private sector, has elicited praise from Republicans for his deregulatory agenda and criticism from Democrats for his refusal to take action on climate change and several public health priorities. He has been running the agency since Trump's first administrator, Scott Pruitt, stepped down in July amid scandals surrounding his management and spending practices. Trump said in November that he intended to nominate Wheeler for the top job, saying he had done a "fantastic job" in his interim role.



At his confirmation hearing in January, Wheeler highlighted dozens of significant rules that the EPA has begun to roll back in the past two years, and he made clear to lawmakers that he intended to continue the Trump administration's reversal of environmental regulations.

"Through our deregulatory actions, the Trump administration has proven that burdensome federal regulations are not necessary to drive environmental progress," Wheeler said at the time. "Certainty, and the innovation that thrives in a climate of certainty, are key to progress."


Despite the litany of rollbacks, the EPA under Wheeler also has began initiatives aimed at reducing lead exposure around the country and providing oversight for a class of unregulated, long-lasting chemicals known as perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl compounds, or PFAS, that pose serious health risks to millions of Americans. But the agency has yet to take definitive regulatory action on those proposals.

One Republican, Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, voted against Wheeler's confirmation Thursday on the grounds that he had worked to water down federal rules curbing greenhouse gas pollution from power plants and to weaken fuel standards for the nation's cars and pickup trucks.


"I believe that Mr. Wheeler, unlike Scott Pruitt, understands the mission of the EPA and acts in accordance with ethical standards; however, the policies he has supported as Acting Administrator are not in the best interest of our environment and public health, particularly given the threat of climate change to our nation," Collins, who supported Wheeler's confirmation as deputy EPA administrator last year, said in a statement.

While Democrats initially viewed Wheeler as a pragmatic technocrat with whom they could forge a handful of policy compromises, they expressed disappointment over key decisions he has made at the agency.

Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, had voted to confirm Wheeler as EPA deputy administrator last year. But opposed Wheeler's confirmation this time, he said, in light of his push to freeze vehicle fuel efficiency standards and to revisit the cost-benefit analysis the agency used to impose limits on mercury pollution that power companies have already achieved.


"As Acting Administrator, he hasn't demonstrated a desire or a will to make any meaningful progress on clean drinking water standards and has rolled back clean air standards that are directly impacting West Virginians," Manchin said in a statement.

Democrats used the vote as an opportunity to call for greater action on climate change, with more than six senators speaking to a nearly empty chamber about why the federal government should press for steeper cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. "It ought to tell us a lot that the Republicans put up a coal lobbyist to represent the people of America, leading the Environmental Protection Agency," said Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I.

The world has warmed more than 1 degree Celsius since pre-industrial levels, and a United Nations report last fall concluded that humans need to cut their carbon emissions nearly in half over the coming decade to stave off the most catastrophic impacts of climate change. So far, that appears unlikely, as many nations aren't hitting the emissions targets they set as part of the 2015 Paris climate accord. Global emissions also rose in 2018.

But most Republicans, including Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Chairman John Barrasso of Wyoming, said Wheeler had eased the burden on industry without undermining key environmental protections. Barrasso pointed to the EPA's push to scale back limits on carbon dioxide emissions from power plants and the federal government's jurisdiction over water bodies in the United States.

"During the last administration, the EPA issued punishing regulations that would hurt the economy and raise costs on families," Barrasso said. "Under acting Administrator Wheeler's leadership, the EPA has taken a different approach."

Industry officials credited Wheeler as helping spur the economy by restraining what they view as federal overreach.

"Regulatory certainty has been key to the historic manufacturing job growth we've seen under the current administration, and that would not have been possible without Andrew's leadership at EPA," Jay Timmons, president and CEO of the National Association of Manufacturers said in an statement.


And Karen Harbert, president and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's Global Energy Institute, said Wheeler's "extensive experience" had prepared him to serve as the nation's top environmental official.


"Unlike with some nominees, we do not have to speculate about what Mr. Wheeler will do in office," Gore said. "From his actions as acting administrator for the past eight months, we have clear evidence of his agenda: undermine rules to limit toxic mercury, allow more smog and water pollution, and roll back protections against the threat of climate change. The senators who voted to entrust Mr. Wheeler with our environment know exactly what he will do with that power."