Editorial: The environmental review process is broken, but Trump’s plan goes too far

By THE DENVER POST EDITORIAL BOARD |
PUBLISHED: February 12, 2020 at 2:03 p.m. | UPDATED: February 12, 2020 at 4:14 p.m.

The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is critical to protecting America’s environment from overzealous government agencies and polluting corporations. If you’re not familiar with the law, one thing you need to know is that it founded the Environmental Protection Agency and vested the new federal branch with the power to stop polluters and demand better for our world.

However, the other thing you need to know is that the implementation of one small portion of the law — environmental impact studies — has been imperfect.

These studies are required for every public — or quasi-public — project for good reason. Before we invest billions of dollars and break ground on a project, we need to do everything possible to minimize harm.

Widening Interstate 70, for example, is a large endeavor that the federal review process has made much better than it otherwise would have been, securing major wins for a marginalized community. Was the outcome perfect? No, the project will still have a negative impact; all projects have some impact.

But the I-70 approval process also lasted an excruciatingly long period of time. The environmental impact study began in 2003, a draft was issued in 2008, and it took about another decade for construction to start, in part because of lawsuits and challenges stemming from the impact study process.

There’s no reason it should take that long to begin a project.

That brings us to President Donald Trump. In 2017 the president issued an executive order asking the Council on Environmental Quality to adjust the rules surrounding impact studies. “More efficient and effective federal infrastructure decisions can transform our economy, so the federal government, as a whole, must change the way it processes environmental reviews and authorization decisions,” Trump wrote before outlining his vision for a better review process.

We agree in large part with the spirit of that order.

The executive order does not try to change the National Environmental Policy Act. It lays out guidelines to make rules implementing one small portion of the act dealing with environmental impact studies and other reviews more efficient.


Imagine if we could have had the same outcome for I-70 (a park-like cap on the interstate reconnecting a fractured neighborhood, extensive mitigation to prevent harmful dust and exhaust from being inhaled by nearby residents and a stormwater purification system to prevent harmful run-off pollution) in about half the time. Is it possible the new I-70 would already be up and running? We think so.

Does the actual proposal released just this month and now barreling toward approval – a 60-page redline of the environmental impact study rules – achieve the right balance?

We fear it swings the pendulum of oversight too far in the other direction.

For example, the new rules would exclude projects that are “non-discretionary,” or if “compliance with NEPA would clearly and fundamentally conflict with the requirements of another statute.” The effect of this would be to allow congressionally ordered projects to skip the NEPA process. No offense to our lawmakers, but we know they are fallible and can order wrong-headed endeavors that without further study could do real harm. The selling of leases to drill for oil and gas on the Thompson Divide comes to mind. Thankfully, the NEPA environmental study process shut down proposed drilling before it could happen and those leases were revoked.

And, the trend now is for projects to come by presidential fiat. Like it or not, Trump has established the president’s power to use an executive declaration of emergency to steal money already appropriated to other projects for his own personal pet projects. Trump has done it and now future presidents will do it.  Under Section 1501.1 we fear such executive orders would also be exempted from NEPA review.

Trump’s administration should dial back the proposal to achieve its goal without jeopardizing the environment.

Showdown over Trump’s plan to overhaul landmark law’s environmental reviews heads to Colorado
Hearing on NEPA set for Denver as 50-year-old law guides environmental reivew of project in Vail Valley

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: February 9, 2020 at 6:00 a.m. | UPDATED: February 11, 2020 at 7:55 a.m.

The showdown over President Donald Trump’s proposed trimming of environmental reviews for roads, bridges and pipelines under the nation’s foundational look-before-you-leap law hits Denver this week — just as that law guides a precedent-setting decision in western Colorado’s booming Vail Valley.

A Czech entrepreneur has requested a paved road through the White River National Forest, on protected habitat for rapidly declining elk, to allow the development of gated luxury estates on his 680-acre “inholding” of pristine high-country aspen meadows.

His push for a road to enable development on this inholding — private land surrounded by public forest — became so controversial that the U.S. Forest Service launched a years-long review under the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA, to consider possible harm.

For 50 years, the NEPA law has served as an environmental Magna Carta, obligating Americans to anticipate impacts before embarking on any major development projects involving the federal government, whether through funding, permitting or the work itself. It forces about 170 detailed environmental impact studies across the nation each year, and 10,000 lesser assessments, federal records show.

But White House officials, with support from the fossil-fuel industry and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, are moving ahead with a revamp of how NEPA reviews are done and, on Tuesday, they’re holding a hearing at the Environmental Protection Agency’s regional headquarters in Denver. This overhaul stands out as the most ambitious step in Trump’s deregulatory agenda to help speed up development and infrastructure work by rolling back clean air and water protections.

The environmental review in western Colorado that has encompassed nearly a decade has led to careful vetting of the effort by Florida-based Czech entrepreneur Petr Lukes and co-owner Jana Sobotova to construct Berlaimont Estates, featuring 19 homes each built on a parcel of land 35 acres or larger. The project hinges on building a 26-foot-wide access road that rises 2,000 feet through forest.

Lukes declined an interview request from The Denver Post.

For the landowners, the fact-gathering, investigation and analysis of likely environmental impacts began with a process called scoping in 2009. The initial proposal was put on hold to work with Eagle County officials before intensifying NEPA reviews began in 2016.

“I don’t think we would have wanted any less thorough of an environmental review,” said Andy Hensler, a Colorado-based consultant that the property owners hired to navigate the process. “The review is important. And we have learned a lot through the process. We are looking at modifications, things we could do to lessen our impact.”


U.S. Forest Service supervisor Scott Fitzwilliams hasn’t revealed a decision yet, but emphasized in an interview that he’s bound by federal case law saying his agency must provide adequate access for owners of inholdings. An environmental impact statement, 400 pages long, is nearly done along with a draft final decision.

Strong opposition
Colorado opposition has been fierce, with thousands of residents petitioning the Forest Service to reject the road, pointing to the plummeting elk, the potential for recreational overload in a forest that is already the most visited in the nation, and a potentially costly precedent for catering to inholdings owners.

Elk herds across a broad area around the Vail Valley have decreased by 40% over 20 years and suburban-style development now covers much of the valley bottom.

State wildlife officials warned of problems as the review began in 2016. Gov. Jared Polis, U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet and Rep. Joe Neguse, all Democrats, last summer weighed in, urging close attention in a letter to Fitzwilliams, noting the road would mean changing a forest management plan to open up an area that’s been closed from November through May to help elk survive.

The year-round road and development also could threaten sensitive species, the leaders said, including lynx, cutthroat trout, sage grouse, brewer’s sparrows and delicate rare plants.

The controversy reverberated to the point that plumber Tim Wolf, an avid hunter who has run Gypsum-based Flowheat Inc. for two decades, took a personal stand against further fragmentation of habitat by declaring he won’t work on any new development in the Vail Valley.

“Development has encroached on a lot of our wildlife resources. The more we keep building, the more we’re going to encroach. I choose not to partake in any new construction. I don’t want my name on any more new houses until we figure out our wildlife situation,” Wolf said.

Overhauling NEPA
This battle in western Colorado has emerged as a precedent-setting test of how NEPA, launched under President Richard Nixon in 1970, compels reviews, ensures public meetings where all sides can be heard and, when necessary, spurs science-based analysis. The law created the Council on Environmental Quality in the White House.

On Jan. 9, the council’s leaders, under Trump, formally proposed a revamp to “modernize” environmental reviews, following more than a year of behind-the-scenes discussions. Proposed changes would narrow the use of NEPA so that infrastructure development from roads to fossil-fuel pipelines can be done more easily and swiftly.

The changes would reduce the types of projects and impacts that require environmental review. A requirement that decision-makers analyze a project’s cumulative environmental impacts, which federal courts have interpreted to include climate change, would be removed.

Changes also would limit the consideration of indirect impacts. Federal agencies wouldn’t be allowed to weigh environmental impacts that occur later or in locations away from the project as part of a lengthy causal chain. Changes also would let companies conduct their own environmental impact reviews, in consultation with federal officials. Public comments would be restricted to those that are deemed timely and specific.

“Projects or activities that require a federal permit or approval would continue to be subject to review,” White House environmental council spokesman Dan Schneider said.

But the impacts on the environment to be analyzed “must be reasonably foreseeable and have a reasonably close causal relationship to the proposed action,” Schneider said.

The proposed change to let developers and companies conduct their own environmental impact studies still “would require the decision-making agency official to provide guidance, participate in the preparation, independently evaluate the statement and take responsibility for its content,” he said, adding that “the involvement of applicants and contractors will be disclosed.”

Overall, the revamped NEPA “would provide for a faster process while ensuring that agencies analyze and consider the environmental impacts of proposed actions and reasonable alternatives to address significant impacts,” Schneider said.

EPA officials tapped to host the hearing in Denver declined to discuss the changes, referring queries to the White House. A final hearing is planned for March in Washington, D.C., before implementation.


Slashing “red tape”
Those pressing to shorten environmental reviews include the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the fossil-fuel industry’s American Petroleum Institute, which casts NEPA environmental reviews as “red tape” that delays development, including thousands of miles of proposed new oil and gas pipelines.

Red tape means “endless and repetitive reviews” for renewable energy, natural gas and oil projects that have been “misused to delay and derail development, which hurts job creation, reduces tax revenue and saps investments in communities across the country,”  API spokesman Reid Porter told The Post.

“The need to modernize the NEPA process isn’t unique to the natural gas and oil industry. While the intent of NEPA is to benefit the environment and future generations of Americans, in practice, hundreds of projects have been delayed in the last decade by NEPA,” Porter said. “Uncertainty around costs and timelines can make projects uneconomical and, without updating NEPA, many will never be built.”

Labor union leaders, too, have challenged the need for lengthy environmental reviews.

But the push for a revamp ignited wide opposition, including a bipartisan group of 140 lawmakers including Rep. Diana DeGette, D-Denver, who signed a letter to the White House calling the changes “out of step,” warning that they “ignore both the reality of climate change and the critical role NEPA plays in addressing complex problems like climate change.”

The National Wildlife Federation, a conservation group representing 6 million hunters, anglers and other nature lovers, is helping to prepare for a legal challenge. The federation’s senior attorney Melissa Samet said White House changes to the NEPA amount to “death by a thousand cuts implemented by machetes.”

NEPA’s mark on Colorado
About 120 miles west of Denver, the environmental review of the Berlaimont Estates road marks the latest of numerous reviews that have tempered impacts of development in mountainous western Colorado.

During the 1980s, as Interstate 70 was widened through Glenwood Canyon in the western part of the state, an initial proposal to blast canyon walls and re-channel the Colorado River was revised because of a NEPA review.

In 1989, outrage over a Forest Service plan to clear-cut aspen groves to supply wood to a waferboard factory spurred a NEPA review and a revised decision that saved many trees.

And after the establishment in 2000 of the Canyons of the Ancients National Monument that includes thousands of archaeological sites, a required review of proposed oil and gas seismic exploration led to a deal that avoided the most significant cultural features and fragile habitat.

The Forest Service decision on the Berlaimont Estates road will set a precedent for how much forest degradation will be tolerated to give adequate access to inholdings. Forest supervisor Fitzwilliams said the environmental review under current rules has been helpful.

“This has been a lengthy environmental impact study process. Some projects take thorough and deep analysis like this because of the controversy. This one just required a deep dive,” Fitzwilliams said. “Even if you don’t like the end result, at least by reading through the documents and through the public engagement process you can understand why we did what we did.”

Thousands of residents opposed to the road signed petitions that were delivered to federal decision-makers. Wilderness Workshop attorney Peter Hart, representing mountain residents, said a weakened NEPA process would have limited the ability of residents to weigh in.

“If they streamline the process, there would be less opportunity for public participation, less opportunity for people to comment, less opportunity for the agency to analyze all the impacts this project could have. It would result in a less thorough decision,” Hart said.

This week, some of those fighting the Vail Valley road proposal planned to attend the hearing in Denver on the NEPA revamp. They’re planning to submit comments to White House officials favoring a continued robust process for comprehensive environmental reviews.

Among them will be Wolf, the plumber.

“I’m taking a hit in my income, but this isn’t really about money. All that glitters isn’t gold. These are our animal resources. Look at what we have done to this Earth for the last 200 years. We humans are the worst predators of all,” Wolf said.

Maintaining robust NEPA reviews for major developments matters, he said. “Otherwise, when does anybody have an opportunity to make a statement?”

Environmental groups sue EPA over missed deadline on Colorado plan for oil, gas pollution
Lawsuit seeks action by federal agency, says public must be protected

By JUDITH KOHLER | jkohler@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: February 19, 2020 at 1:11 p.m. | UPDATED: February 19, 2020 at 6:08 p.m.


Two environmental groups are suing the Environmental Protection Agency for what they say is a failure to ensure that required plans are in place to protect Colorado’s Front Range from pollution produced by oil and gas operations.

The Center for Biological Diversity and the Center for Environmental Health filed a complaint Wednesday in federal court in Northern California that adds the metro Denver area to a lawsuit saying the EPA has missed deadlines for approving state plans targeting oil and gas emissions. The Colorado plan covers a nine-county swath in the Denver-metro area and to the north along the Front Range that has violated federal air quality standards for years.

In December, the EPA downgraded the area from being a “moderate” violator of the standards to a “serious” violator, which will require stricter controls to reduce pollution. But Robert Ukeiley, an attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity, said the lawsuit addresses the plan the state submitted as a response to the less serious designation.

Ukeiley said then-Gov. John Hickenlooper’s administration submitted the plan in May 2018 and the EPA’s deadline for approving or rejecting the plan was Nov. 14, 2019. He said the agency didn’t respond to his organization’s earlier notice that it intended to sue.

The EPA will evaluate the complaint, Richard Mylott, the spokesman for the agency’s regional office in Denver wrote in an email.

“EPA’s recent action to reclassify the Denver area to serious nonattainment reflects our commitment to work with Colorado to address ozone emissions across all sources contributing to impaired air quality,” said Mylott, adding that the new designation will require new categories of controls on emissions.

The EPA’s approval of Colorado’s plan for tackling the ozone pollution problem along the Front Range is more than a bureaucratic exercise, Ukeiley said.

“The value of the plan is to protect us from the pollution,” Ukeiley said. “If the EPA disapproves the rules, the state will have to make them better or the EPA will create its own rules.”

If the EPA approves the rules and the public doesn’t believe they’re strong enough, ” at least we can go to court and challenge that approval,” Ukeiley added.


“Delay in implementing these protections leads to more cases of asthma,” Caroline Cox, research director at the Center for Environmental Health, said in a statement. “It should not be this difficult to get the EPA to make sure children and families have clean air to breathe.”

Emissions from oil and gas operations as well as vehicles are major sources of ground-level ozone, which can trigger such health problems as asthma and other respiratory ailments. Children, older adults and people who exercise or work outdoors are especially at risk, according to the EPA.

Heat and sunlight bake pollutants, including some of the chemicals emitted by oil and gas operations, to form ozone, or smog. Weld County, portions of which are in the area out of compliance with the ozone standard, has nearly 22,000 of the state’s roughly 53,000 active wells.

State regulators through the years have tightened regulations on drilling along the Front Range, including establishing the first state regulations for methane emissions in 2014. Stronger air quality regulations are among the rules the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission and the state Air Quality Control Commission are writing to implement a new law revamping how oil and gas are regulated. Rules approved in December include more frequent inspections of oil and gas equipment for leaks.