EPA declares Colorado a “serious” violator of federal air quality standards, forcing stricter efforts to reduce pollution
Colorado must reduce pollution by 2021

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: December 16, 2019 at 4:05 p.m. | UPDATED: December 17, 2019 at 9:01 a.m.

The Environmental Protection Agency on Monday reclassified Colorado as a “serious” violator of federal air quality laws, forcing stricter state efforts to reduce air pollution.

“EPA is taking this action based on monitoring data showing that ozone remains a challenge in Denver and northern Front Range communities,” the agency’s regional administrator Greg Sopkin said in a prepared statement announcing the decision.

This triggers a requirement that Colorado must reduce pollution by 2021, and the state health department plans to issue permits for any industrial operation that emits more than 50 tons of pollution a year, down from the current permitting threshold of 100 tons.

Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment air pollution control officials are planning to issue about 600 more permits, which set limits and give a basis for compliance inspections. The officials within a year must submit a plan to the EPA for reducing ozone levels to meet health standards.

Ozone contributes to a degradation of air quality along the Front Range that has led to respiratory problems, such as asthma, which occurs in Denver at higher rates than in other U.S. cities and above the national norm.

“The department is on it,” agency director Jill Hunsaker Ryan said in a statement. “We already adopted a zero-emission vehicle rule this year. We are pursuing additional resources that will allow us to nearly double our capacity to inspect oil and gas production facilities. And starting tomorrow, the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission will begin its hearing on proposed rules under Senate Bill 181 that will reduce pollution and unnecessary leaks at oil and gas operations.”

EPA officials had been delaying this decision to reclassify Colorado as a “serious” rather than “moderate” violator, holding a public hearing this year even though Gov. Jared Polis indicated in March that the state wouldn’t pursue exemptions from the federal law. Polis declared that Colorado wouldn’t seek a “blame it on China” waiver that former Gov. John Hickenlooper pursued based on wafting international pollution. Polis instead has ordered action to clean up bad air.

State air quality commissioners this week are expected to approve tighter regulations for the oil and gas industry, a source of the volatile organic chemicals that contribute to the formation of ozone.

Zero-emission electric vehicles are expected to reduce emissions from more people driving. Earlier this year, state air commissioners required better technology at breweries and set standards for consumer products and architectural and industrial coatings that can release volatile organic chemicals that boost ozone.


Since 2004, Colorado has been flunking federal air quality health standards with ozone air pollution exceeding a decade-old federal limit of 75 parts per billion, let alone the current limit of 70 parts per billion. The World Health Organization recommends no more than 50 parts per billion to protect human health. Europe has set a limit of 60 parts per billion.


Colorado air monitors this year have measured ozone pollution around 79 parts per billion along the Front Range — still exceeding the 75 parts per billion limit.

“The air in beautiful Colorado has been unsafe to breathe for far too long,” Center For Biological Diversity attorney Robert Ukeiley said, urging better control over oil and gas industry operations as an important next step.

“The state is required to attain the 70 parts per billion standard by August 2021,” Ukeiley said. “There’s no reason for the state to take longer than that considering that ozone can kill people and cause other irreversible impacts.”

Colorado regulators OK rules aimed at cutting pollution, greenhouse gases from well sites
Oil and gas industry argues costs of more inspections to companies, communities will outweigh benefits

By JUDITH KOHLER | jkohler@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: December 19, 2019 at 5:22 p.m. | UPDATED: December 19, 2019 at 5:27 p.m.

State regulators Thursday approved more frequent inspections of oil and gas equipment statewide, with a special provision for homes and schools within 1,000 feet of well sites, as Colorado continues to target air pollution and greenhouse gases.

The Colorado Air Quality Control Commission approved new rules after three days of hearings in Denver and earlier public meetings across the state. Tougher controls on oil and gas emissions are required under Senate Bill 19-181, signed into law in April.

The rules proposed by the state Air Pollution Control Division are also part of the state’s response to the move by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to declare a nine-county swath in the Denver metro area and along the Front Range in “serious” violation of federal ozone pollution standards. The classification will bring tighter controls on pollution sources, including oil and gas.

This is just round one for the commission as it considers new regulations to carry out SB 181 and other new state laws setting carbon-reduction goals to tackle climate change and requiring data on the levels of greenhouse gases.

The Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission has approved a set of new rules and is working on others to implement SB 181, which prioritizes public health ,safety and the environment when making decisions about oil and gas development.

“I think the most significant thing is that they’re not just kicking the can down the road and calling it good. They’re actually giving clear direction in what they expect in the coming year,” said Jeremy Nichols, head of the climate and energy program with WildEarth Guardians. “And I think they’re being very clear to the (air pollution control) division that they have high expectations.”

Kelly Nordini, executive director of Conservation Colorado, said in a statement that the policies adopted by the commission are an important step toward “cleaning up our air and fighting climate change at its source.”

However, industry representatives joined community officials from some of Colorado’s major gas-producing areas in questioning whether the benefits from incremental changes are worth the costs to companies and local governments that depend on oil and gas for jobs and revenue.

A coalition of cities and counties in western Colorado and on the Eastern Plains presented reports that said tougher regulations on smaller well sites could cause some companies to plug and abandon wells, creating a ripple effect through local economies. Job losses could range from 55 to 280 full-time positions and the loss of revenue for governments could reach nearly $4 million, according to the Western and Rural Local Government Coalition.


State staffers disputed the costs cited by the industry and the warnings about the financial impacts, saying that the economic damage predicted by the oil and gas industry when previous regulations were approved didn’t pan out.

“We heard similar comments in 2014 and 2018,” said Leah Martland, a supervisor in the air pollution control division. “We do not see a discernible trend in plugged and abandoned wells as related to air quality regulations.”

But industry representatives said their calculations show that going from annual to twice-yearly inspections in areas that meet federal air-quality standards won’t yield enough reductions in emissions to warrant the costs.

“The industry did a lot to come to the table and did come to the table with real data, real information and they accepted most of the division’s proposed rules. They feel like they were not really heard,” said  Chris Colclasure, an attorney representing the Colorado Oil and Gas Association.

Colclasure said it was frustrating when the division staff said it didn’t have enough data or information from the industry. One or two commissioners said they wish they had more information “but then they simply voted to adopt the rules without having that information,” Colclasure said.

One of the rules approved  by the commission came from a coalition of community organizations, including the League of Oil and Gas Impacted Coloradan and the Western Colorado Alliance. It would increase the required number of inspections using infrared cameras to look for emissions at well sites within 1,000 feet of homes, schools and other occupied buildings.

The commission directed the staff to consider the rest of the coalition’s proposal, which would impose rigorous deadlines for making repairs and fixing leaks at sites near homes and schools.

Another rule addresses emissions from pipelines. A group that included companies operating pipelines and environmentalists came up with a recommendation that will allow companies to develop individual plans.

“It’s a first-of-its-kind performance-based standard for the transmission sector,” said Matt Garrington of the Environmental Defense Fund. “It puts the companies in the driver’s seat to find best ways to cut emissions.”2