Colorado will fight Trump administration’s move to block California from setting stricter vehicle emission rules
A dozen states and the District of Columbia also follow California’s fuel economy standards

By JOHN AGUILAR | jaguilar@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
September 18, 2019 at 9:16 a.m.

Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser vowed Tuesday night to challenge the Trump administration’s “unprecedented action” of revoking California’s authority to set its own auto mileage standards.

Colorado is directly affected by the forthcoming directive, given the state’s decision to mirror California’s low-emission vehicle standards. In August, Colorado adopted a zero-emission standard requiring that at least 5% of automakers’ vehicles available for sale by 2023 be electric.

“This action is a direct assault on our system of cooperative federalism and an effort to undermine the role of states in addressing #climatechange,” Weiser wrote on Twitter. “Colorado will be challenging this ‘unprecedented action.’ ”

In revoking California’s ability to set its own vehicle standards, the administration is asserting that only the federal government has the power to regulate greenhouse gas emissions and fuel economy.

Conservative and free-market groups have been asked to attend a formal announcement of the rollback set for Wednesday afternoon at Environmental Protection Agency headquarters in Washington.

The Boulder-based Southwest Energy Efficiency Project released a statement Tuesday saying the Trump administration’s move “would be a direct attack on Colorado’s participation in the Clean Cars Program.”

“The Clean Cars Program requires automakers to build cars that emit less carbon pollution, and to introduce more electric vehicles to Colorado markets,” the statement said.

But Tim Jackson, head of the Colorado Automobile Dealers Association, praised the decision by the Trump administration, saying “it should be up to the federal government to set nationwide emission standards.”

“Multiple, conflicting standards set by states or local jurisdictions are complicated, costly and contradictory,” he said. “Colorado residents can be assured that no longer can unelected bureaucrats appointed by Colorado’s governor cede authority for air quality here to unelected bureaucrats based in Sacramento, California.”

The Trump administration’s move comes after the Justice Department recently opened an antitrust investigation into a deal between California and four automakers for tougher pollution and related mileage requirements than those sought by President Donald Trump. Trump also has sought to relax Obama-era federal mileage standards nationwide, weakening a key effort by his Democratic predecessor to slow climate change.

Top California officials and environmental groups pledged legal action to stop the rollback.

California’s authority to set its own, tougher emissions standards goes back to a waiver issued by Congress during passage of the Clean Air Act in 1970. The state has long pushed automakers to adopt more fuel-efficient passenger vehicles that emit less pollution. A dozen states and the District of Columbia also follow California’s fuel economy standards.

Trump administration drops Obama-era water protection rule
Environmental groups criticized the administration’s action

By JOHN FLESHER | The Associated Press
PUBLISHED: September 12, 2019 at 2:56 p.m. | UPDATED: September 12, 2019 at 3:57 p.m.

TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. — The Trump administration on Thursday revoked an Obama-era regulation that shielded many U.S. wetlands and streams from pollution but was opposed by developers and farmers who said it hurt economic development and infringed on property rights.

Environmental groups criticized the administration’s action, the latest in a series of moves to roll back environmental protections put into place under President Barack Obama.

The 2015 Waters of the United States rule defined the waterways subject to federal regulation. Scrapping it “puts an end to an egregious power grab, eliminates an ongoing patchwork of clean water regulations and restores a longstanding and familiar regulatory framework,” Environmental Protection Agency chief Andrew Wheeler said at a news conference in Washington, D.C.

Wheeler and R.D. James, assistant secretary of the Army for civil works, signed a document overturning the rule and temporarily restoring an earlier regulatory system that emerged after a 2006 ruling from a sharply divided Supreme Court.

The agencies plan to adopt a new rule by the end of the year that is expected to define protected waterways more narrowly than the Obama policy.

The Clean Water Act requires landowners to obtain federal permits before developing or polluting navigable waterways such as rivers and lakes. But disputes have long persisted over what other waters are subject to regulation — particularly wetlands that don’t have a direct connection to those larger waters, plus small headwater streams and channels that flow only during and after rainfall.

Environmentalists contend many of those smaller, seemingly isolated waters are tributaries of the larger waterways and can have a significant effect on their quality. Denying them federal protection would leave millions of Americans with less safe drinking water and allow damage of wetlands that prevent flooding, filter pollutants and provide habitat for a multitude of fish, waterfowl and other wildlife, they said.

“By repealing the Clean Water Rule, this administration is opening our iconic waterways to a flood of pollution,” said Bart Johnsen-Harris of Environment America. “The EPA is abdicating its mission to protect our environment and our health.”

Wheeler said regulators had gone far beyond the intent of Congress under the 1972 clean water law.


“The 2015 rule meant that more businesses and landowners across the U.S. would need to obtain a federal permit to exercise control over their own property, a process that can cost tens of thousands of dollars and take months or even years to complete,” he said. “It also put more local land-use decisions in the hands of unelected bureaucrats. Many Americans balked at this idea, and rightfully so.”

President Donald Trump had ordered the EPA and Army Corps to develop a replacement policy that has a more restrictive definition of protected wetlands and streams.

The Natural Resources Defense Council said the administration’s action would be challenged in court.

“The Clean Water Rule represented solid science and smart public policy,” the group said in a statement. “Where it has been enforced, it has protected important waterways and wetlands, providing certainty to all stakeholders.”

Zippy Duvall, president of the American Farm Bureau Federation, said the 2015 rule had generated a greater sense of urgency among its membership than any other issue.

“When you take the private property rights from a man that’s worked all his life … to grow the food and fiber for all of us to sit down and enjoy three times a day, it’s something he just can’t stand,” Duvall said.

The question of which waters are covered under the Clean Water Act has inspired decades of lawsuits and numerous bills in Congress.

The Supreme Court in 2006 produced three differing opinions, leading the Obama administration to craft its rule. It provided federal oversight to upstream tributaries and headwaters, including wetlands, ponds, lakes and streams that can affect the quality of navigable waters.

The regulation drew quick legal challenges from 31 states and court rulings blocking its implementation in some. It was effective in 22 states, Washington, D.C., and U.S. territories before Thursday’s action.

Betsy Southerland, who was director of science and technology in EPA’s Office of Water during the Obama administration, said revoking its policy would create further regulatory confusion.

“This repeal is a victory for land developers, oil and gas drillers and miners who will exploit that ambiguity to dredge and fill small streams and wetlands that were protected from destruction by the 2015 rule because of their critical impact on national water quality,” Southerland said.

Sen. John Barrasso, a Wyoming Republican and chairman of the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, applauded the Trump administration move, saying the Obama rule “would have put backyard ponds, puddles and prairie potholes under Washington’s control.”

Democratic Rep. Dan Kildee of Michigan, where two disputes over federal wetlands permits led to the 2006 Supreme Court case, said Trump “has decided to weaken protections for our water and reward corporate polluters.”