Suncor Energy oil refinery north of Denver emits burst of “clay-like” and hydrogen sulfide air pollution
Adams County commissioner raises concerns that Suncor hasn’t provided crucial information for surrounding community

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: March 17, 2020 at 9:20 p.m. | UPDATED: March 18, 2020 at 10:48 p.m.

An equipment failure at Suncor Energy’s oil refinery north of Denver led to a burst of opaque yellow and hydrogen sulfide pollution Tuesday, triggering a company “vapor release alarm” and prompting operators to shut down a unit and monitor emissions in surrounding neighborhoods.

This happened less than two weeks after Colorado health officials announced a negotiated legal settlement with Suncor for previous violations — an agreement that officials hailed as an opportunity to “reset” a pattern of pollution problems at the refinery.

On Wednesday, state air pollution control officials said they’re investigating this latest incident for possible future penalties and called for a complete report from Suncor within 30 days. And state regulators are counting on remedies laid out in the settlement, such as a requirement that Suncor hire a third-party consultant to determine root causes of repeated equipment failures at the refinery, said Andrew Bare, spokesman for the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment’s Air Pollution Control Division.

Suncor sent air pollution officials a notice saying initial company investigations detected “excess opacity from one of the fluidized catalytic cracking units and excess hydrogen sulfide from one of the plant flares,” Bare said.

Hydrogen sulfide can be deadly. But state officials have reviewed some of their own data from state-run monitoring stations and found that pollutant concentrations were well below  National Ambient Air Quality Standard limits.

Highly visible yellow clouds billowed out from the refinery starting around 5:40 p.m. Tuesday, spreading mostly “clay-like” catalyst material. Suncor crews blocked off Brighton Boulevard temporarily as they shut down malfunctioning equipment.

A Suncor statement posted on social media after the incident said: “All employees are accounted for and community air monitoring is in place.”


Adams County Commissioner Steve O’Dorisio, who lives slightly more than 2 miles from the refinery and drove to the scene, raised concerns that Suncor did not provide crucial facts in an initial notice to county emergency managers.

“I’m concerned that the information doesn’t say the severity or how people should respond. We don’t know if people were placed at risk or need to do anything as a result of this incident. We need more information. We need information people can use to determine if they should take any action,” O’Dorisio said.

“As a member of the community and as a leader, I am concerned that I still don’t know how to respond when I get this type of information that really doesn’t tell us anything.”

The smoky emissions this week marked the latest in a series of incidents at the refinery, in Commerce City, just north of Denver. Equipment failures led to similar operational upsets Dec. 11 and Nov. 27, according to CDPHE and company statements. Refinery workers were moved to safe zones.

State air pollution control officials said they were aware of the equipment failure within an hour of the incident and were monitoring the refinery Tuesday night. Typically, CDPHE air officials respond by reviewing air-monitoring data collected at state-run pollution monitoring stations placed around the refinery.

Suncor shut down the failing unit and notified state officials at 6:05 p.m. that one of its air blowers failed. “State officials do not believe there is an ongoing risk to the community,” Bare said in a statement Tuesday night. “Air blowers keep air and catalyst circulating. This failure resulted in highly visible opacity emissions.”

Inside the plant, Suncor crews used handheld devices to measure various materials, including hydrogen sulfide and sulfur dioxide.

“We know that the air blower in one of the refinery’s fluidized catalytic cracking units failed. We do not know yet why it failed,” Bare said Wednesday night in a statement that referred to Colorado’s legal settlement provisions requiring a third-party investigation of problems.

“We expect that the refinery will be a more compliant facility once these and other provisions of the settlement are put in place. We will also be investigating this incident thoroughly to determine lawful and appropriate steps to provide accountability and address root causes.”

The Suncor oil refinery ranks among the state’s largest polluters, emitting more than 800,000 tons a year of heat-trapping greenhouse gases and other pollutants, including sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, ozone-forming volatile organic compounds, nitrogen oxides and particulates, according to state and federal data.

The state sets limits for how much Suncor can emit that are listed in an air pollution permit. Canada-based Suncor has had problems for years despite investing heavily to keep the refinery running.

This month, state public health officials announced the negotiated settlement with Suncor that also requires the company to pay administrative penalties and embark on projects — to resolve state complaints about multiple air-pollution incidents between 2017 and 2019 at the refinery. Suncor must pay $1 million in penalties to the state and an additional $426,705 for other penalties to the state and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, state officials said in announcing what they called an “historic” settlement for a single facility. An additional $2.6 million must be paid to fund community environmental projects, state officials said.

The Denver Post last year reported that Suncor refinery operators broke a 12.8-ton limit for hydrogen cyanide, an invisible toxic gas that at high concentrations can be deadly. Neither Suncor nor state health officials alerted nearby residents or county emergency managers after a test detected the elevated hydrogen cyanide emissions.

The Colorado Latino Forum, representing north Denver and other residents near the refinery, issued a statement of concern lamenting “yet another incident at Suncor” and “a tepid response by Suncor.”

Community members “are left with questions,” said the statement by forum co-chair Ean Tafoya.

“Until samples are collected and analyzed by CDPHE, we won’t be certain that no harmful chemicals were released … With the COVID-19 response, are we certain that CDPHE staff are available and prepared for a response?  Is anyone hurt? … How are they notifying the surrounding community? A siren and an executed plan? We have been pushing to build a plan by and for the people with Suncor and all the necessary government agencies. The community deserves a better plan and CLF is committed to ensuring its creation.”

A Suncor social media update on Wednesday noted that “this is the same unit that experienced an issue on December 11, 2019, during start-up.” Suncor officials wrote that, after the December incident, “we committed to do better. Clearly, yesterday is not an example of doing better, and we have more work to do.”

Suncor tested air inside and downwind of the refinery. “The data has not shown any readings of concern,” the statement said.

“This was a serious event and we are giving it our full attention. We have launched an investigation to determine the exact cause of the air blower trip. We need to understand this information prior to a safe re-start.”

Trump rollback of mileage standards guts climate change push

By ELLEN KNICKMEYER and TOM KRISHER | The Associated Press
PUBLISHED: March 31, 2020 at 7:51 a.m. | UPDATED: March 31, 2020 at 11:47 a.m.

WASHINGTON — The Trump administration rolled back ambitious Obama-era vehicle mileage standards Tuesday, raising the ceiling on damaging fossil fuel emissions for years to come and gutting one of the United States’ biggest efforts against climate change.

The Trump administration released a final rule Tuesday on mileage standards through 2026. The change — after two years of Trump threatening and fighting states and a faction of automakers that opposed the move — waters down a tough Obama mileage standard that would have encouraged automakers to ramp up production of electric vehicles and more fuel-efficient gas and diesel vehicles.

“We are delivering on President Trump’s promise to correct the current fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions standards,” Andrew Wheeler, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, said in a statement Tuesday marking the release.

He said the final rule “puts in place a sensible” national program that “strikes the right regulatory balance that protects our environment, and sets reasonable targets for the auto industry. This rule supports our economy, and the safety of American families.”

Opponents contend the change — gutting his predecessor’s legacy effort against climate-changing fossil fuel emissions — appears driven by Trump’s push to undo regulatory initiatives of former President Barack Obama and say even the administration has had difficulty pointing to the kind of specific, demonstrable benefits to drivers, public health and safety or the economy that normally accompany standards changes.

The Trump administration says the looser mileage standards will allow consumers to keep buying the less fuel-efficient SUVs that U.S. drivers have favored for years. Opponents say it will kill several hundred more Americans a year through dirtier air, compared to the Obama standards.

Even “given the catastrophe they’re in with the coronavirus, they’re pursuing a policy that’s going to hurt public health and kill people,” said Chet France, a former 39-year veteran of the EPA, where he served as a senior official over emissions and mileage standards.

“This is first time that an administration has pursued a policy that will net negative benefit for society and reduce fuel savings,” France said.

Delaware Sen. Tom Carper, the senior Democrat on the Senate Environmental and Public Works Committee, called it “the height of irresponsibility for this administration to finalize a rollback that will lead to dirtier air while our country is working around the clock to respond to a respiratory pandemic whose effects may be exacerbated by air pollution.


In Phoenix, meanwhile, resident Columba Sainz expressed disappointment at the prospect of losing the Obama-era rule, which she had hoped would allow her preschool age children to break away from TV indoors and play outside more. Sainz reluctantly limited her daughter to a half-hour at the park daily, after the girl developed asthma, at age 3, at their home a few minutes from a freeway.

“I cried so many times,” Sainz said. “How do you tell your daughter she can’t be outside because of air pollution?”

Trump’s Cabinet heads have continued a push to roll back public health and environment regulations despite the coronavirus outbreak riveting the world’s attention. The administration — like others before it — is facing procedural rules that will make changes adopted before the last six months of Trump’s current term tougher to throw out, even if the White House changes occupants.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which has been the main agency drawing up the new rules, did not immediately respond to a request for comment Monday.

Earlier drafts of the mileage rollback have shown the administration struggling to justify relaxing the mileage standards. Trump officials contend vehicles will be cheaper for Americans to buy, because automakers will have saved on emissions-cutting technology. Former EPA emissions officials say the cost of more fuel, and costs like increased healthcare bills from the extra pollution, cancel out any sticker savings.

The standards have split the auto industry with Ford, BMW, Honda and Volkswagen siding with California and agreeing to higher standards. Most other automakers contend the Obama-era standards were enacted hastily and will be impossible to meet because consumers have shifted dramatically away from efficient cars to SUVs and trucks.

California and about a dozen other states say they will continue resisting the Trump standards in court.

Last year, 72% of the new vehicles purchased by U.S. consumers were trucks or SUVS. It was 51% when the current standards went into effect in 2012.

The Obama administration mandated 5% annual increases in fuel economy. Leaked versions of the Trump administration’s latest proposal show a 1.5% annual increase, backing off from its initial proposal simply to stop mandating increases in fuel efficiency after 2020.

The transportation sector is the nation’s largest source of climate-changing emissions.

John Bozzella, CEO of the Alliance for Automotive Innovation, a trade group representing automakers, said the industry still wants middle ground between the two standards, and it supports year-over-year mileage increases. But he says the Obama-era standards are outdated due to the drastic shift to trucks and SUVs.

The Trump administration standards are likely to cause havoc in the auto industry because, with legal challenges expected, automakers won’t know which standards they will have to obey.

“It will be extraordinarily disruptive,” said Richard J. Pierce Jr., a law professor at the George Washington University who specializes in government regulations.

States and environmental groups will challenge the Trump rules, and a U.S. District Court likely will issue a temporary order shelving them until it decides whether they are legal. The temporary order likely will be challenged with the Supreme Court, which in recent cases has voted 5-4 that a District judge can’t issue such a nationwide order, Pierce said. But the nation’s highest court could also keep the order in effect if it determines the groups challenging the Trump standards are likely to win.

“We’re talking quite a long time, one to three years anyway, before we can expect to get a final decision on the merits,” Pierce said.