Colorado sees “significant declines” in air pollution as coronavirus ramps down driving, industrial activity
Investigating these trends is “premature” and “not a priority” during current health crisis, state officials emphasize

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
PUBLISHED: April 5, 2020 at 6:00 a.m. | UPDATED: April 5, 2020 at 11:47 a.m.

So long, sulfur dioxide. Goodbye, carbon monoxide.

At least temporarily, air pollution that hurts human lungs has decreased sharply along Colorado’s Front Range, and in cities worldwide, with driving and industrial activity ramping down as the novel coronavirus spreads, according to data reviewed by The Denver Post.

And this horrific pandemic is giving an unsolicited, yet possibly useful, glimpse of what it might take to bring an atmosphere clogged with toxic and heat-trapping gases, which contribute to climate change, back to a healthier balance.

Particulates pollution, nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide also decreased this month around metro Denver — by up to 50% in some areas — compared with concentrations a year ago, the data shows. Decreases since January were even more abrupt, by 80% in the case of sulfur dioxide downtown.

Air quality researchers at the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment looked at what fixed sensors were measuring in response to queries by The Post. They provided data from five monitoring stations that federal and state regulators use to track Colorado’s legally mandated efforts to deal with bad air that for two decades has flunked national health standards.

Investigating air pollution trends during the COVID-19 crisis is “premature” and “not a priority,” state officials emphasized, cautioning that more data would be needed to draw firm conclusions.

But “we see significant declines,” Garry Kaufman, director of Colorado’s Air Pollution Control Division, said in an emailed statement.

“We have a network of air monitors throughout the state, including the Front Range,” he said. “We will continue to operate and maintain these monitors, and they will continue to provide us with valuable data. Because the disease is respiratory, air quality is more important now than ever.”


U.S. and European satellites have observed significant decreases in nitrogen dioxide levels following shutdowns in China, Europe and across the United States. Satellite images over the past two weeks, provided by researchers to The Post, showed markedly reduced muck in the air over Los Angeles, New York and Seattle.


Unlike this satellite data, the Colorado data comes from air-testing instruments positioned near ground level that measure concentrations of multiple pollutants that people inhale.

The data provided to The Post, comparing pollutant concentrations between March 2019 and March 2020, showed the following average decreases:

Sulfur dioxide (SO2) dropped by 36%. A toxic gas that comes mostly from industrial burning of coal and other fossil fuels, sulfur dioxide weakens lung defenses and impairs breathing. It can cause wheezing, chest tightness and shortness of breath, especially in people with asthma.
Carbon monoxide (CO) decreased by 20%. The pollutant is linked to driving and other activities that at high levels chokes off oxygen entering the blood.
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) fell by 24%. This pollutant wafts out of vehicle tailpipes and power plants, irritating eyes and throats, causing respiratory distress. Scientists watch it as a relatively quick indicator of air pollution trends.
Nitric oxide (NO) decreased by 26%. A precursor to nitrogen dioxide and ground-level ozone (O3), which worsens respiratory problems and is linked to thousands of premature deaths, it comes from burning fossil fuels.
Large particulates (PM10, smaller than 10 microns) dropped by 37% and fine particulates (PM2.5, smaller than 2.5 microns) fell by 45%. A wide range of industrial activities and vehicle transport churn up particulates, which affect respiratory health, especially hurting people with asthma. Particulate pollution also is a major component of the haze that frequently obscures views of Colorado’s white-capped Front Range mountains.
Measurements of the main heat-trapping greenhouse gases that cause global warming — carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4)  — haven’t been done. These pollutants mix into the atmosphere and concentrations don’t respond quickly to changes. As temperatures rise and soil warms in spring, carbon dioxide levels tend to rise. Record-high atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide and methane are expected this year, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration officials said Thursday. And any effects of virus-related ramp-downs on these global warming drivers likely wouldn’t show up for months.

A nearly-empty I-25 exit ramp to ...Hyoung Chang, The Denver PostA nearly-empty Interstate 25 exit ramp to Colfax Avenue in Denver on Sunday, March 29, 2020.
Too soon to tell
Colorado researchers said it’s too early to determine the effects of virus-related shutdowns on ozone, for which the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has deemed Colorado a “serious” violator of federal health limits.

Pinpointing the extent to which reductions result from less driving, less flying or less factory and power plant activity would require further study, state authorities said.

Over the past month, driving in Colorado has decreased with hundreds fewer cars on roads each day. Gov. Jared Polis noted at a briefing last week, that automatic traffic recorders measured a 60% reduction in vehicles.

Another factor may be a partial shutdown since March 17 after an equipment failure at the Suncor Energy oil refinery north of Denver, which ranks among Colorado’s largest polluters, emitting 800,000 tons a year of heat-trapping and other gases including sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, ozone-forming volatile organic compounds, nitrogen oxides and particulates. The refinery has been plagued with equipment failures, despite heavy investments, and state regulators on Wednesday sent Suncor a letter urging steps to prevent future problems, saying continued “opacity exceedances” are unacceptable.

In New York, Boston and other cities, air quality researchers are attempting to measure changes in nitrogen dioxide, carbon dioxide and other pollution following the imposition of stay-at-home orders and shutdowns.

Scientists say air-testing data collected during the coronavirus pandemic must be analyzed carefully, taking into consideration the influences of cloud cover, wind and sun — which affect the concentrations of pollutants people breathe. Meanwhile, World Health Organization teams are investigating whether particulate air pollution may be a vector that spreads COVID-19 and makes it more virulent.

Pollution trends as humans suddenly drive much less and shut down industrial activities amount to what some scientists are calling a massive and unwanted “natural experiment” on air quality.

“Obviously, the priority here is getting through this with the maximum number of people healthy —  mentally and physically,” said Boulder-based atmospheric chemist Tammy Thompson, senior air quality scientist for the Environmental Defense Fund.

“But there is this data that can help scientists understand how to improve air quality once things go back to normal. This will help us understand what sources are causing the biggest impacts. And hopefully it will get us more motivated to do something about it,” Thompson said. “There is a link between air pollution and human health.”

Ramping back up
Some air experts now are considering the extent to which rapidly ramping up industry, transport and energy activity if the virus subsides necessarily would entail ramping up harmful air pollution. Shifts toward working from home and online meetings, if sustained, could help reap health and environmental benefits.

Nearly-empty streets of a residential area ...Hyoung Chang, The Denver PostNearly-empty streets of a residential area on the east side of Sloan’s Lake in Denver on Sunday, March 29, 2020.

Non-polluting renewable energy in recent months moved ahead of coal in the United States for generating electricity, and it appears that investment in clean energy is likely to continue after the virus, said Vivienne Heston, spokeswoman for the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, a think tank on efforts to accelerate green utilities development.

“That’s good for reducing carbon emissions,” Heston said. “There’s a strong argument to be made for renewables. We are definitely in a transition, and the world has to decide how quickly we want to transition.”

After the economic Great Recession of 2008-2009, air researchers estimated that total carbon dioxide pollution decreased by about 2%. But then carbon dioxide concentrations bounced back to record high levels.

Beyond air chemistry, economics and the virus, much will depend on politics, Thompson said.

“We need to have the right people making decisions at federal and state levels who care about cleaning up the air.”

EPA officials defend their role amid rollbacks as agency hits 50: “Expect continued improvements” in Colorado
Agency comes under fire from Colorado AG, state public health officials: “It would be better if we had a fully invested EPA”

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
April 26, 2020 at 6:00 a.m.

Fifty years after America’s first Earth Day spurred cleanups that led to the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency, Colorado residents face less toxic muck, and pollution will decrease more in the future, federal enforcers say — rejecting claims that President Donald Trump has hobbled a once-robust agency.

People in Colorado and surrounding states who are bothered by the degradation of air, land and water should “expect continued improvements,” EPA regional administrator Greg Sopkin told The Denver Post.

But EPA regulatory rollbacks this week reached the point that Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser launched a legal battle to restore wetland and waterway protections. And state leaders accused the EPA of leaving states on their own to deal with unprecedented climate and health threats.

Colorado’s public health department, for example, is struggling to carry out state lawmakers’ order to cut heat-trapping greenhouse gas pollution from about 125 million tons a year to around 62 million tons by 2030 and 13 million tons by 2050 — even though the U.S. Supreme Court more than a decade ago ruled that the EPA has regulatory power to tackle this problem.

“The EPA still has a lot of very committed people with strong regulations in a number of areas where they are doing good work, and we have good coordination on enforcement, on things like Superfund, especially here at the Denver regional level,” said John Putnam, the state health department’s director of environmental programs. “At the same time, at the headquarters level, their policy initiatives to roll back critical environment protections make our jobs much harder and are not going to be protecting the environment.

“While it’s true we are cleaner now than 50 years ago and the Cuyahoga River (in Ohio) is no longer on fire, we have ozone pollution standards that we’re not meeting in Colorado and a large part of that is related to vehicle emissions standards that haven’t been strengthened. We’re not making progress on a number of fronts and we’ve seen rollbacks. … It would be better if we had a fully invested EPA.”

Bicyclists demonstrate near the state capitol ...Duane Howell, Denver Post fileBicyclists demonstrate near the state capitol during the first Earth Day in Denver on April 22, 1970. Since first Earth Day, Colorado environmentalists have taken significant steps to improve the ecology in the state.
Rollbacks and “intentional disregard”
Golden anniversaries of Earth Day last week and the EPA this year — as nature drives a deadly virus pandemic — put a focus on the agency’s mission of ensuring a cleaner and healthier environment.

The EPA began in December 1970, five months after President Richard Nixon proposed it, and grew into an often-opaque bureaucratic juggernaut with a budget of $8.1 billion and more than 14,000 employees.

U.S. withdrawal from the international agreement to combat global warming, along with rule rollbacks, have slowed momentum that once inspired emulators abroad. Climate activists now widely denounce U.S. extraction and burning of fossil fuels, pointing to record-high global atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide (414 parts per million, up from 325 ppm in 1970), and Denver neighborhood groups question the EPA’s effectiveness.


“There are people in there with good hearts who want to help, but the leadership has been replaced with a who’s who from industry,” said Green Latinos state organizer and Colorado Latino Forum co-chairman Ean Tafoya, who represents low-income community interests in climate action, cleaner water and better access to public open space.

“By limiting windows for public comment, they certainly are muzzling voices of the people,” Tafoya said. “And rolling back enforcement during a crisis like this? It can only be seen as intentional disregard of frontlines communities.”

An American Lung Association air quality analysis last week ranked the Denver-Aurora metro area 10th worst in the nation, and Colorado Moms Know Best leader Jen Clanahan urged faster reduction of methane and ozone pollution.

EPA rollbacks in recent months include weakening clean car standards, reducing protection of waterways and wetlands, rejecting a tougher limit on soot, and easing control over mercury pollution from power plants. Trump administration officials have declared the environment cleaner than in the past and, deriding what they decry as Obama-era regulatory overreach, are prioritizing de-regulation to boost commerce.

Yet core federal laws remain on the books requiring clean water, clean air, healthy habitat to save species, and look-before-you-leap reviews of proposed new development.

A view of Denver can be ...Helen H. Richardson, The Denver PostA view of Denver can be seen with Pikes Peak in the background on April 15, 2020, from Thornton. With fewer cars on the roads and planes in the air, clearer skies have been seen since stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus pandemic took hold of the city.
“Emphasis on environmental protection”
EPA officials defend their role amid rollbacks as agency hits 50: “Expect continued improvements” in Colorado
Agency comes under fire from Colorado AG, state public health officials: “It would be better if we had a fully invested EPA”

By BRUCE FINLEY | bfinley@denverpost.com | The Denver Post
April 26, 2020 at 6:00 a.m.

Inside the EPA, top officials disputed criticisms from environmentalists and public health leaders.

A Denver-based team of 50 staffers who conduct field inspections will carry out work enforcing those laws across Colorado and five other states — Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota and Utah — as well as 28 tribal nations. They’ll conduct more than 500 scheduled on-site inspections by the end of the year, Sopkin and regional enforcement director Suzanne Bohan said in a Post interview.

EPA leaders also will launch new initiatives, such as a crackdown on installers of “defeat devices” that turn trucks into belchers of foul black exhaust, they said. They’ll require Colorado to submit an action plan by Aug. 3 to end persistent violations of federal air quality health standards, in part by requiring permits that set limits for all facilities that emit more than 50 tons a year of the volatile organic chemicals that lead to the formation of ground-level ozone smog.

And the controversial Waters of the United States rule that the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers issued Tuesday will still require protection of some intermittent streams in Colorado and the West, they said. The new rule relaxes Clean Water Act limits on destruction of wetlands and pollution of rivers and streams, including the “ephemeral” water bodies typical in the southwestern United States that dry up part of the year.

Coloradans concerned about disappearing nature and environmental degradation reasonably can harbor “a lot of hope for the future, even with an expanding population” and know “that the pollution levels will come down,” Sopkin said.

“I’m very optimistic. Colorado is an incredibly beautiful state, just like all of the Region 8 states, and there’s always going to be an emphasis on environmental protection of Colorado air, land and water. The EPA will continue to enforce, continue to do its due diligence, making sure the regulated community is following the laws,” he said.

The Trump administration’s rollback of fuel-efficiency limits on tailpipe pollution will lower prices of cars and trucks, enabling more Americans to upgrade out of dirtier old vehicles, Sopkin said.

EPA career staffers conduct compliance work in addition to inspections, Bohan said. “Our work has definitely not slowed down under this administration. We are as busy as ever,” she said, and a fair assessment should look beyond numbers of inspections and new enforcement cases.

“While our numbers might be lower, I can assure you we are 100% committed to the compliance assurance work we do.”

“Unacceptable impacts”
An EPA temporary enforcement discretion policy during the coronavirus pandemic has been “mischaracterized” to imply companies can decide for themselves whether to report on emissions and obey laws, Sopkin said. Agency chiefs said in a letter to Congress that they adopted the policy in response to industry concerns to enable prioritizing responses to “acute risks and imminent threats” rather than routine monitoring and reporting.

In recent meetings with industry trade groups, Sopkin said, he emphasized that this policy “is not a license to pollute” and won’t excuse criminal conduct. The policy “just recognizes that we are going to have enforcement discretion with regard to routine matters,” to be exercised after virus-related operational ramp-downs end.

Sopkin also defended the waterways rule, saying it will reduce uncertainty for farmers who otherwise might have to hire lawyers. He said “intermittent” waterways where melting snow flows toward “navigable interstate water” still will be protected.

Colorado AG Weiser announced the state will file a lawsuit fighting the rule because it illegally removes protection of many wetlands and the “ephemeral waters” common across the semi-arid West — affecting up to 70% of waterways in Colorado. The new rule will allow “unacceptable impacts,” hurting Colorado’s economy and water quality, Weiser said.

The EPA rollbacks shift burdens to states in tackling challenges such as climate warming. Colorado officials are wrestling with how to reduce air pollution from burning fossil fuels enough to meet state requirements, mulling reductions from electricity-generating power plants, commuters in cars, oil and gas companies and other industrial sources.

The EPA for years, long before Trump was elected, has delegated protection work to states, offering mostly technical support. That means state agencies must take the lead on dealing with leaky facilities such as the Suncor oil refinery north of Denver, where equipment failures have led to excess pollution above levels set in permits, including emissions of toxic hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen cyanide, sulfur dioxide and other hazardous chemicals listed in government consent decree documents.

Suncor shut down a processing unit at the refinery in March following the latest in a flurry of failures, and EPA officials are engaged with state inspectors on that matter, Bohan said, declining to to specify “proposed enforcement.”

Colorado inspectors “are looking now at root causes,” she said.

“We have been talking. … It involves very detailed on-site inspection work to look at all their processes. We already know we’ve got some major issues. We are working with Colorado and have reached out to them to offer our assistance.”