A U.S. tribe wants to resume whale hunting. Should it revive this tradition?
Makah Tribal Council member Patrick DePoe

By SUSANNE RUST
DEC. 1, 20195 AM

NEAH BAY, Wash. —  Each year at this time, gray whales begin the roughly 6,000-mile journey south from their summer feeding grounds in Alaska to their calving and breeding lagoons in Mexico’s Baja peninsula.
This year, an administrative trial in Washington state could dictate whether the Makah tribe can resume hunting the whales during future migrations.

The Makah, who live in the Olympic Peninsula’s northwest corner, Neah Bay, have asked the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for a waiver from the Marine Mammal Protection Act so they can restart their traditional whale hunt, harvesting up to 20 animals over the next 10 years.

They are supported by the federal government and tribal communities around the globe, who point to an 1855 treaty specifically granting the Makah the right to hunt whales. In return for $30,000, and the ceding of 300,000 acres, Washington’s then-Gov. Isaac Stevens granted the Makah “the right of taking fish and of whaling or sealing.”

The Makah are the only U.S. tribe with whaling specifically mentioned in its treaty.

For Patrick DePoe, an aspirational whale hunter and treasurer of the Makah tribe, the law is crystal clear: “Nobody has to like it. But they do have to respect it. It’s the law.”


The trial highlights a contentious and emotional rift between those who support the rights of Native Americans to continue traditional ways of life — rights that were and are supported by law — and those who believe that in some cases, such as whale hunting, those traditional practices must be reevaluated under a modern light.

“This isn’t about subsistence. They don’t need the whales to survive,” said Margaret Owens, an activist and founder of Peninsula Citizens for the Protection of Whales, based in the Olympic Peninsula. “The whales, they live for decades, they know each other. They are sentient beings.”

Owens and her partners, Sea Shepherd Legal and the Animal Welfare Institute, are concerned mainly with the welfare of the whales. But their legal arguments target more scientific issues, including the federal government’s obligation to protect vulnerable populations of whales, such as an endangered population of gray whales in the North Pacific and a genetically distinct population of resident whales that veer east from the northward migration and feed in Puget Sound for several months. There are concerns these whales could be accidentally killed in a hunt.

They also question the government’s decision to move forward with the hunt while whales are inexplicably dying off in large numbers along the Pacific Coast. On May 31, NOAA announced it was investigating an “unusual mortality event” among gray whales. More than 214 have washed up along North America’s west coast since January.

“We don’t really know how bad it is,” said D.J. Schubert, a biologist with the Animal Welfare Institute, referring to the fact that most whales sink after they die, suggesting hundreds if not thousands more could be dead. In 1999 and 2000, after a similar die-off, the population shrank by 25%. A cause was never determined.

“The Arctic is changing rapidly. The food web has been significantly altered. That’s not going to get better,” he said. “And so, from our perspective, let’s just put this on hold. At least until NOAA determines what the causes are.”

The parties battled publicly at a trial last month in a federal building in Seattle, where Administrative Law Judge George Jordan listened to seven days of testimony from nearly two dozen scientists and activists.

Sitting in a U-shape around the judge, lawyers and experts for the federal government and the Makah faced off with attorneys and scientists for the animal welfare groups. Owens, who has been described as the “voice” of the whales, sat at the bottom of the U — across from the judge, with two official time keepers.

The parties listened to expert witnesses, cross-examined them, and often called for redirect. They engaged in sometimes-heated exchanges over the impact of the unexplained whale die-off, the genetic implications of sub-groups of whales and the impact of climate change on the Arctic.

Jordan is expected to submit a nonbinding report with his opinion to the federal government in January. After a period of public comment, NOAA will decide whether to grant the waiver and allow the Makah to apply for a hunting permit.

Hunting could begin as early as the end of next year — or be delayed indefinitely, if welfare groups challenge the waiver and permits, and bring the hunt back to court.

For the Makah, the wait has been too long.

For thousands of years, the Makah and their kin, the Nuu-chah-nulth nation — whose coastal territory spread from Neah Bay up along the Pacific coast of Vancouver Island — hunted whales for subsistence. The practice runs through their language and culture, and the tribe’s symbol, a thunderbird holding a whale in its talons, speaks to its centrality for tribal identity.

“The thunderbird brought us the whale and fed us” when the Makah were starving, DePoe said, explaining the legend behind the symbol.

The tribe voluntarily stopped hunting in the 1920s, he said, as they saw the whales being hunted to near extinction by commercial whalers.

“We have always lived sustainably and in balance with our environment,” said DePoe, walking a visitor around the Makah cultural center in Neah Bay. Pointing to various exhibits showing the tribe’s craftsmanship, boat building skills and mastery of textiles, he noted the Makah’s approach to fishing and timber, which incorporates strict limits and quotas, designed to keep the ecosystem in check.

Roughly 1,500 Makah live on the tribe’s reservation, which is situated at the end point of the Olympic Peninsula — a mountainous, rugged landscape, flanked by the Pacific Ocean on the west and the Strait of Juan de Fuca, or Salish Sea, to the north. The village of weathered homes and buildings sits adjacent to a protected harbor and the tribe’s marina.

On a recent visit, a bald eagle was seen roosting in a leafless tree along the town’s main artery, Route 112, as cars and pickup trucks slowly cruised by in the cold, dark rain.

In 1994, after a nearly seven-decade hiatus from whale hunting, gray whales were delisted from the Endangered Species Act. With their numbers surpassing sustainable levels, the Makah lobbied for the delisting and were granted permission by the United States government to hunt again. On May 17, 1999, the tribe harpooned and killed a 30-foot juvenile female.

The tribe used a combination of modern and traditional techniques. The initial harpooning was done from a canoe. When the whale was struck, more harpoons were thrown — all attached to floats — to keep the whale from diving.

A rifleman on a nearby motorized boat then shot the whale in the head with a .50-caliber armor-piercing assault rifle — providing a large enough blast to break through skull and pierce the brain. The shot was followed by a second.

The use of a gun allows for a quick, humane death, according to Allen Ingling, a retired professor of veterinary medicine at the University of Maryland, who was hired by the Makah to study quick, efficient and humane methods of killing.

According to an environmental assessment report by NOAA, Ingling and the Makah assessed a variety of weapons for “efficiency, safety, and humaneness.” They tested them in water tanks and even had an opportunity in the field: In 2010, Ingling and others fired three shots from a .577, in combination with drug injections, to euthanize a 30-foot humpback who’d stranded itself on a beach in East Hampton, N.Y.

In 1999, estimates suggest it took roughly eight minutes between the time the first harpoon hit the young whale until it died.

DePoe and his co-councilman, Nate Tyler, said traditional hunts, without the use of a rifle, often took hours or days — putting the whale through excruciating pain and fear, while endangering the lives of hunters.

“It took incredible strength and bravery,” said Tyler, who explained how hunters would sometimes dive underwater after harpooning a whale to sew its mouth shut, keeping water out of its body, and therefore afloat. The traditional sewing was not done in 1999, and the whale sank.

DePoe, who was 17 at the time of the 1999 hunt, said he remembers the excitement he felt when the older men in his tribe killed the whale, pulled it from the depths, and towed it to land.

“It brought together our community,” he said, describing the butchering on the beach and the meals and celebrations that followed.

His sentiment was echoed by Monique Villa, 36, a waitress at the Warm House restaurant in Neah Bay.

Overlooking the Makah marina, as cold winds blew in over the gray, choppy-water from the Pacific, Villa, the mother of five children, says the 1999 hunt led to a resurgence of pride in her community, and the schools now teach the Makah language and the children are excited to learn about their ancestors.

“I get chills when I remember that day,” she said.

The Makah were blocked from hunting again after activist groups accused the federal government of failing to conduct a thorough assessment under the National Environmental Policy Act. The administrative law trial that ended two weeks ago in Seattle marks the end of a nearly 20-year process by the government to legally evaluate the hunt.

But not everyone along the southern coast of the Salish Sea — the waters between the Olympic Peninsula and Vancouver Island — is excited about the potential resumption of hunting.

Owens, a curator at the Depot Museum in Joyce, a community about 50 miles east of Neah Bay, believes the hunt is unnecessary and cruel.

Sitting in the town’s old train depot, a 1915 log building built by employees of the Chicago-Milwaukee Railroad, she pointed to a map of the whales’ birthing grounds in Mexico. There, she says, the whales become accustomed to and trusting of humans from an early age; tourists touch and pet the calves, oohing and aahing as young whales approach with their mothers.

When they get to the Olympic Peninsula, and venture east into the Salish Sea to feed in the grounds their mothers and grandmothers did before them, they are not afraid of the canoes or the boats that approach.

“It’s a betrayal,” Owens said. She said she has nothing against the Makah. Rather, she deeply respects them, she said. She just doesn’t support the killing of whales.

For DePoe and Tyler, however, Owens and those who oppose the hunt are emblematic of those who have, for centuries, told them how they should behave, worship and live. And DePoe is frustrated that he has to convince anybody of his legal right to hunt.

“I shouldn’t have to explain. It’s none of their business. It’s the law,” he said.

Government scientists say the hunt, which would grant the tribe roughly 2.5 whales per year, will have an insignificant effect on Eastern Gray Whale populations, which the last census suggested is at a historically high level — about 27,000 whales.

In addition, a quota from the International Whaling Commission allows Russian and U.S. tribes to kill an average of 141 every year. The Russian Chukotka tribe has largely hunted the annual maximum quota. The two or three whales the Makah could claim would come from this quota — so their take would come from animals already targeted.

Opponents worry that whales from the western part of the Pacific, which migrate along Asia’s east coast and number about 140, could get caught in the hunt. Radio tags indicate some of these whales occasionally join the eastern Pacific whale migration from the Arctic down to Mexico.

One of the Makah’s witnesses, a geneticist who works with ExxonMobil, claims the western Pacific whales are not, in fact, a distinct group. The oil company has a facility in the western Pacific, at Sakhalin Island, where the whales are known to frequent.

In addition, some of the whales that migrate along the North American coast never reach Alaska; instead they feed in the Salish Sea and along the coast from Northern California to British Columbia. These animals are a genetically distinct population, and they too could become targeted.

It is these whales, known as Pacific Coast Feeding Group, that particularly concern Owens. These creatures hug the shores of the peninsula from the Makah’s hunting grounds at Neah Bay all the way toward Seattle.

Pointing from a vista known as Tongue Point into Crescent Bay — a stunning harbor of cliffs, white sands and rugged, rocky islets jutting from the water below — she noted where she had brought her children over the years to watch these resident whale mothers and their calves feed as they returned each spring.

“They came here for protection,” she said.

Then, as a pair of oyster catchers raced by in the sky and two harlequin ducks paddled in the water below, she turned her back to the water and climbed the stairs toward the parking area above, stopped and sighed.

“They learned it was safe here,” she said.

California faces a crossroads on the path to 100% clean energy

By SAMMY ROTHSTAFF WRITER 
DEC. 12, 20195:30 AM

Bill Brand spent two decades fighting to get the waterfront power plant in Redondo Beach torn down and replaced with a public park. Until recently, he was sure he had won.

Regulators had set a deadline of Dec. 31, 2020, for owner AES Corp. to shutter the hulking power plant, whose smokestacks are bordered by a marina, six acres of wetlands and some of the most densely populated neighborhoods on the California coast. Plans were coming together for the city to purchase half the site — a triumph for Brand, whose campaign for open space and cleaner air had fueled his rise from activist to Redondo Beach mayor.

Then state officials had a last-minute change of heart.

In a unanimous vote last month, the California Public Utilities Commission said the gas-burning facility should be allowed to keep operating through 2022. The commission said the Redondo Beach facility — and three other coastal gas plants also slated for closure or rebuilding — is needed to keep reliable electricity flowing to Southern California residents for a few more years, until utilities can fully replace them with non-polluting resources.

The power plants in Redondo Beach, Huntington Beach, Long Beach and Oxnard have become an early battleground in an increasingly urgent debate: How much natural gas does California need on its power grid, and for how long?

For climate change activists, the greatest obstacle to ditching gas may be delay, not denial.

About half the state’s electricity came from climate-friendly sources such as solar and wind power last year, and lawmakers have set a target of 100% by 2045. But natural gas, a planet-warming fossil fuel, still generates one-third of the state’s power — and officials don’t yet have a plan for phasing it out.

Whether the four coastal power plants shut down in 2020 or keep running a while longer — a final decision will be made by the State Water Resources Control Board — California’s overall electricity mix won’t change much. The aging Redondo Beach facility, for instance, operated at just 2% of its full capacity last year, meaning utilities were willing to buy its power only on high-demand days when they badly needed a little extra juice.

But clean energy advocates worry a decision to extend the coastal power plants could set a precedent that reverberates for years.

“We have to close the door on gas,” said Luis Amezcua, a senior campaign representative with the Sierra Club.

Brand fears an extension could derail his city’s plans for a park, as well as a “greenbelt” stretching from the beach to the 405 freeway along a corridor now dominated by power lines.

“I don’t think it’s a big deal if it’s maybe one year,” he said. “But what I fear is they’ll be back in two or three years asking for more time.”

Cheap solar, storage are changing everything
Although natural gas burns more cleanly than coal, it’s still one of the biggest sources of climate pollution. Globally, planet-warming carbon emissions from natural gas are rising more quickly than emissions from coal are falling, according to recent research led by a Stanford University scientist.

In an ironic twist, the rapid growth of solar power is one of the reasons energy regulators say it’s too soon to retire the four coastal gas plants.

Growing amounts of California’s electricity are supplied by solar farms — sometimes 50% or more on spring afternoons, when sunshine is abundant and electricity demand is low. But all that solar generation drops off sharply each evening, at which point natural gas plants typically fire up to fill the gap.

The gap is getting bigger as more solar panels are installed and as gas plants shut down. The Public Utilities Commission released an analysis in June showing the state could face electricity shortfalls as soon as 2021 on hot summer evenings when use of air conditioning remains high after sundown.

To address the potential shortfalls, the commission ordered utilities across the state to buy 3,300 megawatts of new resources, enough to power roughly 4.4 million homes. The commission prohibited contracts for new gas-only power plants, a move designed to promote clean resources such as solar power paired with batteries, or “demand response” programs in which utilities pay customers to use less electricity during high-demand periods.

But most of those clean resources are “unlikely to be developed in time to meet the reliability needs in the next few years,” Ed Randolph, director of the commission’s energy division, told the state water board last month — hence the commission’s request to keep the coastal gas plants running past 2020.

“The physical reality today, and in the near future, is that we still need some gas plants,” Randolph said.

He may be right. But in the energy industry, physical reality is shifting so quickly that sometimes utilities and their regulators struggle to keep up.

The day before the Public Utilities Commission recommended an extension for the coastal gas plants, the Los Angeles City Council voted to buy electricity from a solar-plus-storage facility in the Mojave Desert, with lithium-ion batteries designed to pump stored solar energy into the grid for up to 4 hours each night. The city will pay 3.3 cents per kilowatt-hour of electricity — a record low for a solar-plus-storage contract, and cheaper than power from gas.

Last week, BloombergNEF released its annual report on the cost of lithium-ion batteries. The research firm said industry-average battery prices fell 13% in 2019, capping off an 87% decline since the beginning of the decade.

Low-cost clean energy is already putting gas plants out of business.

General Electric Co. said in June it would shutter its 750-megawatt Inland Empire Energy Center in Riverside County by the end of 2019, citing unfavorable market conditions. The gas plant opened barely a decade ago.

Last week, Summit Power Group of Seattle asked the California Energy Commission to terminate the license for its Palmdale Energy Project, a proposed 700-megawatt gas plant in the high desert of northern Los Angeles County.

The Union of Concerned Scientists, a nonprofit advocacy group, released a report last year finding that a quarter of the gas plant capacity connected to California’s main power grid could be shut down immediately without sacrificing reliable electric service.

“Our model was telling us that no new investments in natural gas plants was the lowest-cost option going forward,” said Mark Specht, an energy analyst at the environmental group who coauthored the report.

Clean energy advocates are convinced California could build enough non-polluting resources by summer 2021 to replace the coastal gas plants.

As evidence, they point to the quick response by utilities and regulators to the Aliso Canyon natural gas leak, which constrained gas supplies in the L.A. Basin. To ensure the lights stayed on, Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas & Electric got 100 megawatts of battery storage built in six months.

Why natural gas isn’t done yet
Despite the economic head winds, some energy companies are bullish about natural gas.

Take AES Corp., which is investing more than $2 billion in an overhaul of its gas plant facilities in Huntington Beach and Long Beach.

Like the Redondo Beach facility, which AES also owns, the existing gas turbines at the two sites must be shut down by Dec. 31, 2020, under a state water board regulation requiring power plants to stop using ocean water for cooling. Rather than shutting the plants down, the company is installing new gas turbines that use air for cooling.

An extension from the state water board could keep the existing turbines running for a little while longer. The Public Utilities Commission recommended that the seawater-cooled turbines in Huntington Beach and Long Beach be allowed to keep operating an additional three years, through 2023.

But AES isn’t betting everything on gas.

As part of the $1.3-billion overhaul of its Alamitos facility in Long Beach, the Virginia-based company broke ground in June on 100 megawatts of energy storage. The lithium-ion batteries will be able to supply electricity to the power grid at full capacity for up to 4 hours before they need to recharge.

Ken Zagzebski, president of the AES subsidiary that runs the company’s California facilities, said the batteries will most likely charge during the middle of the day, when there’s lots of cheap solar power on the grid. Then they’ll discharge in the evening, negating the need for some gas-fired generation.

“It’s a flexible resource that can discharge almost instantly,” Zagzebski said.

So why not start the process of shutting down all the gas plants?

A key reason is that renewable energy and batteries can’t do everything gas plants currently do.

Lithium-ion batteries typically store enough electricity only for a few hours — and during the winter, the sun and wind can disappear for days at a time. Building enough solar panels, wind turbines and batteries to keep the lights on even during those cloudy, windless periods would be “extremely costly and impractical,” according to research presented to state officials last month by Energy and Environmental Economics Inc., better known as E3.

The consulting firm released a study in June finding California might still need between 17,000 and 35,000 megawatts of gas capacity in 2050. At the high end, that’s not far from the 41,000 megawatts of gas installed today.

The study was commissioned by Houston-based Calpine Corp., which owns 20 gas-fired plants in the state.

But what about Senate Bill 100, the legislation requiring 100% zero-carbon electricity by 2045?

On the surface, the law appears to require a total phaseout of natural gas, barring significant advances in “carbon capture” technology to prevent emissions from reaching the atmosphere. But to the consternation of environmentalists, state officials have suggested a different interpretation of the law — an interpretation in which California can still burn some gas, so long as the state generates enough clean electricity to cover 100% of retail sales.

The Public Utilities Commission explained how the accounting might work at a workshop last month focused on implementing SB 100. Excess solar power exported to other states during the afternoon could be counted toward the 100% mandate. And electricity lost during the journey from power plant to customer — known as “line loss” — wouldn’t be counted toward retail sales, giving utilities extra room to burn gas without violating the law.

Environmentalists weren’t happy to hear that.

In a comment letter last week, representatives of the California Environmental Justice Alliance, Earthjustice and Sierra Club California wrote that state officials “will squander precious time if they base their first SB 100 report on the false assumption that California can still rely on fossil fuels for electricity in 2045.” They cited a recent United Nations report finding that “deeper and faster cuts” in carbon emissions are needed to avoid climate catastrophe.

“The growing need for rapid action and bold climate leadership from California cannot be overstated,” they wrote.

Clean energy advocates don’t buy the idea that gas plants will still be needed on the power grid of the future. They point to other technologies that might eventually fill the role of natural gas, such as offshore wind turbines, geothermal plants, renewable hydrogen and compressed air energy storage.

Visions of waterfront renewal
Before there was a power plant in Redondo Beach, there was the Old Salt Lake.

At one time, the coastal lake was 200 yards wide, 600 yards long and “surrounded by many salt marshes and pools,” according to Ken Johnson’s 1965 history of Redondo Beach. It was eventually paved over by various iterations of today’s power plant — but in recent years, it’s been making a comeback.

Several concrete-lined retention basins that formerly held fuel oil tanks have filled with water seeping up from the ground, spurring the growth of floating mosses, creeping bentgrass and other plants. When a state ecologist visited the AES facility in 2014, ducks and snowy egrets were using the pools of water.

Over the objections of AES — which said the pools were being fed by nearby injection wells — the California Coastal Commission determined there were six acres of wetlands on the power plant grounds. Commission staffer Tom Lester said at a public meeting in 2015 that wetland characteristics have persisted “likely due to the power plant’s location over what was known as the Old Salt Lake, a saline and spring-fed lagoon.”

“This is basically a case of nature batting last,” Lester said at the time.

On a wall in his office, Brand keeps a historical photo from 1908 — just after the first power plant was built — showing a still-sizable salt lake.

“I never wanted to be a politician. I just wanted to see this properly restored,” he said.

Brand helped defeat several plans backed by AES to redevelop the site, arguing they would allow for too much housing or commercial space along the waterfront. After getting elected to the City Council, he successfully fought the company’s efforts to rebuild the gas plant with technology that uses air for cooling.

Only during the last few years has Brand’s vision of a public park and restored wetlands started to look realistic.

A developer called Next Century Power agreed to buy the 50-acre site and sell half the property to Redondo Beach for $2 million an acre. The state plans to kick in $5 million toward the city’s purchase, and Los Angeles County officials have begun taking steps toward providing additional funding.

On a sunny morning last month, Brand and Stacey Armato, a City Council member in neighboring Hermosa Beach, walked through an overgrown dirt lot just outside the aging gas plant. They stared up at the towering wires that carry electricity from the facility several miles through Redondo Beach.

The homes bordering the plant to the north are part of Hermosa Beach, which has more people per square mile than any other city along the California coast. A Redondo Beach-commissioned study found that nearly 22,000 people live within one mile of the AES facility — more people than live near the coastal gas plants in Huntington Beach, Long Beach and Oxnard combined.

“Each time they fire this plant up, we get complaints from our residents like you wouldn’t believe. It sounds like a jet engine,” Armato said.

“We’ve all been counting down to the retirement date,” she added.

Nobody wants a gas plant
Redondo Beach is far from the only California community where residents have been fighting gas plants.

In the northeast San Fernando Valley, the Los Angeles Clean Energy Coalition is urging city officials to replace Valley Generating Station with cleaner power sources, citing the effects of air pollution on local residents. Glendale residents successfully lobbied city officials this year to substantially downsize a planned rebuilding of Grayson Power Plant, and to replace much of its capacity with solar, wind and batteries.

In Oxnard, environmental justice advocates helped kill Puente Power Project, a planned gas plant that could have worsened an ongoing legacy of pollution in the predominantly Latino, low-income city. They also opposed the Public Utilities Commission’s recommendation that the Ormond Beach gas plant in Oxnard be allowed to keep running for an additional year, citing the potential harm to neighborhoods already suffering from high asthma rates.

All five members of the utilities commission expressed regret before voting to ask the state water board to extend the coastal gas plants.

Commission President Marybel Batjer — who was tapped by Gov. Gavin Newsom this year to lead the agency amid Pacific Gas & Electric’s bankruptcy and a seemingly endless wildfire crisis — called the gas plant decision “probably the most difficult vote that I have had since joining the commission.”

Commissioner Martha Guzman Aceves addressed Bill Brand directly: “I pledge to you, Mayor Brand, that I will never support a further extension.”

Despite those words, some clean energy advocates are skeptical.

Jim Caldwell, a technical consultant at the Center for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Technologies, pointed out that one of California’s largest power sources — the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant — is slated to begin shutting down in 2024. At a public hearing last month, he warned the state water board that the Public Utilities Commission could be back in 2023, asking for more time for the gas plants.

He also criticized the commission for claiming that clean resources such as solar-plus-storage can’t be built quickly enough to meet potential electricity shortfalls in 2021.

“That is self-fulfilling prophecy by the PUC,” Caldwell said. “Those resources are there. They have proven that they can do it.”

The state water board is expected to make a final decision next year.

In Redondo Beach, a single extension might not hinder plans for a public park and wetlands restoration. Representatives of AES and the developer buying the property both said the sale wouldn’t be affected by a state water board decision to let the power plant keep running another two years.

But Brand has kept up a full-court press against an extension, even after being diagnosed with Stage 4 lung cancer in June.

After 18 years pushing for a public park on his city’s waterfront, he’s never been this close — and he doesn’t want to let the opportunity slip away.

“A lot of dominoes are lined up to make this happen. The stars are very much aligned around a retirement date of Dec. 31, 2020,” Brand said. “If they extend that at all, it really throws a wrench into all these plans.