Climate change is looming. But America has lost 600,000 clean energy jobs

By SAMMY ROTHSTAFF WRITER 
MAY 13, 2020 10 AM

The United States shed more than half a million clean energy jobs in March and April, a new report says, reversing years of growth in an industry that has helped reduce lung-damaging air pollution and the emissions responsible for climate change.

Clean energy employment has fallen by 17% since the coronavirus brought much of daily life to a screeching halt, according to unemployment data analyzed by BW Research and published Wednesday by advocacy group Environmental Entrepreneurs. The numbers are especially grim in California, where 105,000 clean energy workers have lost their jobs, more than any other state.

Los Angeles County lost nearly 15,000 clean energy jobs in April alone, 2 ½ times as many as any other U.S. county.

“These are higher numbers than expected, and we were expecting bad numbers,” said Greg Wetstone, president of the American Council on Renewable Energy, a trade group. “It’s painful to see three years of growth essentially wiped out in a single month.”


The 594,300 nationwide unemployment claims span a wide range of job types, including rooftop solar installers, wind turbine technicians and factory workers who build electric vehicles, Energy Star appliances and high-efficiency air conditioning systems.

Around 70% of the newly unemployed people worked in energy-efficiency jobs, which have been hit particularly hard because the installation of new lighting and appliances often involves workers going into homes — a scary prospect during a pandemic.


Despite the sudden nosedive, advocates say the clean energy sector can play a key role in economic recovery efforts.

Before the arrival of COVID-19, nearly 3.4 million Americans worked in clean energy — three times the workforce of the U.S. fossil fuel industry, according to Environmental Entrepreneurs. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projected last year that the country’s two fastest growing jobs over the next decade would be solar panel installer and wind turbine technician.

“The pieces remain in place,” Wetstone said. “Our product, wind and solar power, is very cost-effective.”

The federal government has offered little support for renewable energy thus far. In a tweet last month, President Trump said that his administration would “never let the great U.S. Oil & Gas Industry down” and that he had instructed top officials “to formulate a plan which will make funds available so that these very important companies and jobs will be secured long into the future!”

Trump’s approach to recovery ignores the climate crisis, which is driven largely by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, and which is already contributing to worsening wildfires, droughts, floods and sea level rise in California and across the country.

Outside the White House, the pandemic has unleashed a torrent of proposals for how policymakers might use public dollars to boost employment in the clean energy sector and ensure the transition away from planet-warming fossil fuels is not derailed.

The Washington-based International Monetary Fund released a paper last month calling on national governments to “support green, rather than brown, activities” as they craft recovery plans and to make any support for fossil fuel companies “conditional on making progress on climate.” The IMF stressed that climate crises “may look remote but can strike quickly,” just like the pandemic; that preparedness takes years; and that “the cost of preparing is dwarfed by the cost of not preparing.”

“What we do now will not only reshape our economies and societies, it will also reshape humanity’s future on this planet,” IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said last month. “Coming out of one crisis need not be a prelude to getting into another.”

In California, policymakers are taking that idea to heart.

Gov. Gavin Newsom appointed Tom Steyer, a billionaire former hedge fund manager turned climate change activist, to co-chair his Task Force on Business and Jobs Recovery. Twenty state lawmakers signed a letter last month to Steyer and Newsom’s chief of staff, Ann O’Leary, urging the governor’s office to consider recovery investments that prioritize “clean economy job creation.”

“We know the clean economy — transportation, housing, energy, water, manufacturing, waste, and natural and working lands — is one of the most cost-effective, resilient job creation sectors economy-wide,” the letter reads.

State Sen. Henry Stern (D-Canoga Park), who wrote the letter, is helping develop a detailed proposal for what those investments might look like. In an interview, he listed several areas that could be targeted, including renewable energy facilities such as solar and wind farms, infrastructure to support electric vehicles and water recycling projects to drought-proof Southern California.

“There’s a number of sectors that are hurting right now that we think could give a good return on investment,” Stern said.

He also said it’s important not to draw too much on California’s general fund, because the state faces an estimated $54-billion budget deficit. Other options for policymakers include borrowing money or speeding up the distribution of previously allocated dollars.

Stern is already the coauthor of a $5.5-billion bond measure focused on wildfire prevention, safe drinking water and hardening the coastline against sea level rise. He also suggested lawmakers could require utility companies to purchase more renewable energy than is already required under state law, thus creating more jobs building solar farms, wind farms and other facilities.

Lawmakers could also prompt the Public Utilities Commission to more quickly distribute $1.2 billion in incentives for rooftop solar panels and batteries, which could help Californians keep the lights on during fire-prevention power outages this year.

“We may need to make regulatory changes to get those kinds of dollars out the door,” Stern said.


At the federal level, a coalition of local governments, utilities and auto companies — led by the Los Angeles Cleantech Incubator — is pushing a stimulus plan that calls for $150 billion in federal investment to support to support electric cars and public transit.

The plan includes $25 billion in tax credits and other incentives for buyers and manufacturers of clean vehicles; $85 billion for grid upgrades to support chargers for electric cars, trucks and buses; and $12.5 billion for workforce development and job training.

Gasoline-powered cars and trucks are California’s largest source of climate-changing emissions and the primary cause of Los Angeles’ infamous, lung-damaging smog. Stay-at-home orders and spring rains brought cleaner air and a crisper skyline to the L.A. area in March. But air pollution returned to unhealthy levels for much of April, and traffic is already starting to pick back up.

Cleaning up the transportation sector is especially important given the emerging research suggesting that breathing dirty air makes people more likely to die of COVID-19, said Matt Petersen, president of the Los Angeles Cleantech Incubator.

Clean vehicles are also a proven job creator, he said, with companies including BYD, Proterra and Tesla operating manufacturing plants in California and most major automakers planning to invest billions of dollars in cars and trucks that don’t use gasoline.

The proposed federal stimulus “will create hundreds of thousands of jobs, restart the economy and accelerate growth, support entrepreneurs and the innovation economy, reduce air pollution, and protect vulnerable populations,” Petersen wrote in April.

In a national poll last month, the left-leaning firm Navigator Research found that 76% of registered voters support “investing in the creation of energy efficient infrastructure and the jobs to transition to clean energy.” Support was at 66% among Republicans.

Still, the Republican-controlled U.S. Senate is unlikely to make clean energy stimulus a priority. The same goes for Trump, whose administration has unwound dozens of regulations designed to limit fossil fuels or support renewable power.

Solar and wind energy companies are holding out hope for some federal support.

The U.S. Treasury Department indicated last week that it will extend the “safe harbor” deadline for wind farm projects, giving developers an additional year to finish construction without losing full eligibility for federal production tax credits. Renewable energy trade groups have asked Congress to provide additional relief by allowing solar and wind companies to take advantage of tax credits even if they can’t get tax equity financing, as lawmakers did in 2009 during the height of the Great Recession.

Supporters of more sweeping climate and clean energy policies, such as the Green New Deal, are thinking bigger.

Hundreds of nonprofits have signed on to the Five Principles of Just COVID-19 Relief and Stimulus, a set of proposals prepared by groups including Greenpeace, the Sierra Club, the Sunrise Movement and the Service Employees International Union.

The document calls for public investments to “replace lead pipes, expand wind and solar power, build clean and affordable public transit, weatherize our buildings, build and repair public housing, manufacture more clean energy goods, restore our wetlands and forests, expand public services that support climate resilience, and support regenerative agriculture led by family farmers.”

“The response to one existential crisis must not fuel another,” the document reads.

How the coronavirus is hampering enforcement of California’s air pollution rules

By TONY BARBOZASTAFF WRITER 
MAY 1, 2020 6 AM

The coronavirus is having another unintended effect on California’s environment, hindering the enforcement of clean-air rules that could help protect people’s lungs during the pandemic.

Field inspections have been halted since mid-March at the California Air Resources Board, which enforces rules on trucks, ships and other major pollution sources, because of health concerns about in-person investigations.

“All of our enforcement people are now working on analyzing data that we already have ... and they can do that work from their desks,” Air Resources Board Chair Mary Nichols said. “They are finding and initiating enforcement activities, but they are not out in the field driving around.”

Still, the hiatus means that an array of pollution sources, from soot-belching diesel trucks and cargo ships to methane-leaking landfills and oil and gas sites are undergoing far less scrutiny, at least on the ground, than is typical.

On-site inspections have also decreased at the South Coast Air Quality Management District, which regulates pollution from stationary facilities such as factories and oil refineries across Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino counties.

That shift could be most consequential in the state’s smoggiest areas, including communities near ports, warehouses and freight corridors that remain hard-hit by health-damaging pollution. Air quality improved temporarily during the pandemic, in part because of spring weather. But smog has already returned to Southern California, with a string of recent bad air days in spite of dramatic reductions in vehicle traffic emissions under stay-at-home orders.

The prospect of reduced oversight of polluters worries environmentalists, especially at a time when people’s lungs are at risk from the novel coronavirus and need good air quality more than ever.

“Field inspections are often the best way to ensure that the rules are being followed, and everyone breathing the air in California deserves to know that our lungs and health are being protected,” said Bill Magavern, policy director for the Coalition for Clean Air. “For example, trucks that violate emissions standards expose nearby communities to excessive levels of toxic diesel exhaust, and roadside inspections are the best way to enforce the safeguards.”

In 2019, the state Air Resources Board averaged more than 2,800 inspections a month on trucks, ships, small off-road engines, consumer products and an array of other emissions sources, air board records show. Figures for this year were not available.

After switching to telecommuting on March 17, “we temporarily curtailed physical inspections, in order to meet social distancing requirements, and instead focused on desk audits,” Air Resources Board spokesman Dave Clegern said.

Clegern said the agency’s enforcement program “is open and active. Most of our programs do not rely on physical inspections as the sole means of identifying noncompliance.” Staff members continue to issue citations, close cases and and are able to continue enforcement on a wide range of programs “without conducting physical inspections in the field,” he said.

The Air Resources Board is updating its protocols and working to procure supplies such as masks, hand sanitizer, disinfecting wipes, and gloves, and expects to increase in-person inspections within the next month, focusing on the investigation of complaints at facilities such as landfills “where inspections are critical to ongoing enforcement,” Clegern said.

Southern California air quality officials said they are still conducting field inspections, though less frequently, and with precautions taken to protect employees and the public.

On-site inspections in March declined by about 15% to 20% compared with a year ago, as did complaints from the public about air pollution, according to estimates released by the South Coast air district.

At the same time, the district said it has ramped up surveillance operations, in which inspectors monitor facilities such as oil refineries, power plants and factories from a distance, using remote sensors and other methods to search for excess emissions without coming into close contact with people inside.

The California Environmental Protection Agency said some of its other boards and departments have also cut field inspections because of coronavirus restrictions. The Department of Toxic Substances Control has temporarily halted in-person inspections of hazardous waste facilities. The Department of Pesticide Regulation is still inspecting produce, but not physical stores or manufacturing facilities.

The decline in air inspection visits comes as both state and local environmental regulators in California have announced they will consider requests for temporary relief from compliance obligations that companies are having difficulty meeting because of coronavirus restrictions. Officials have been clear, however, that any leniency they will offer on compliance is far narrower than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency suspension announced in March, which indefinitely waives a broad array of health and environmental protections in response to the pandemic.

An April 15 statement from the state EPA said that “remedies, such as the extension of deadlines, may be warranted,” but that regulated parties must submit “time-limited and specific requests that define the hardship” before falling out of compliance.

In addition to continuing investigations and taking action on complaints, the agency said it “will also fill any enforcement gaps left by the U.S. EPA’s decision to reduce environmental oversight.”

“Controlling pollution in communities with high rates of respiratory disease and multiple environmental burdens remains a priority,” the statement said, “especially given recent studies that suggest a correlation between these factors and COVID-19 susceptibility.”

Research by Harvard University scientists in April found substantially higher death rates from COVID-19 in U.S. counties where residents have been exposed to higher smog levels over years. Health experts suspect that bad air makes people more susceptible to the coronavirus, based on past findings about similar viruses.

The South Coast air district has also issued an “enforcement discretion” advisory offering temporary relief from some requirements.

“You can’t just go out and increase your pollution. You’ve got to abide by those emissions requirements,” South Coast air district Executive Officer Wayne Nastri said. “But if there’s a deadline for a report or if there’s something that you need to submit that’s administrative in nature, we’re going to give you time.”

Nastri said air district staff made the changes after hearing an increasing number of informal requests, ranging from small, mom-and-pop businesses to sprawling oil refineries, that were having trouble meeting their regulatory obligations because of telecommuting, workforce reductions and social distancing requirements.

Bill La Marr, executive director of the California Small Business Alliance, applauded the air district as being responsive to the concerns of businesses that are either struggling or have been forced to shut down, and may be operating with expired permits or other violations.

“They’re going to be a little more open-minded than they normally would,” he said, which will be helpful to operations facing a slew of new requirements because of social distancing and other health constraints, La Marr said. “It’s going to be a real heavy lift, and some things may just be inadvertently overlooked.”

MORE COVERAGE ON CORONAVIRUS IN CALIFORNIA

Vaccinating employees against flu can save companies money.
How you can get a flu shot in Southern California

It’s tough to tell COVID-19 from smoke inhalation symptoms — and flu season’s coming

Arellano: One family’s COVID-19 nightmare shows the pandemic’s unjust burden on Latinos in California

When it comes to inspections, La Marr said he doesn’t think anybody is using the coronavirus as an opportunity to skirt emission rules.

“They don’t go out deliberately to do this,” he said. “They’re interested in making money, and wasting product just through nefarious operations really isn’t economically viable.”

The South Coast district, meanwhile, has moved to stop scheduled fee increases on polluters in response to the pandemic, an action that will result in the loss of an estimated $2.5 million in revenue. That money could be used for agency operations such as hiring inspectors. It would also help reduce a massive, long-standing shortfall between what the district spends regulating emissions and what it recoups through fees.

Adrian Martinez, an attorney at the environmental law nonprofit Earthjustice, said the air district’s actions show it is bending too easily to industry complaints.

“Polluting industries have over the last couple decades built up a significant lobbying presence at AQMD to make it really painful and hard to adopt regulations, to increase fees for the agency to do its job and to develop a real air cleanup plan,” Martinez said, “and this is when that effort really shines.”