Humanity’s methane problem could be much bigger than scientists thought

By BLOOMBERG
FEB. 19, 2020 12:04 PM

Fossil-fuel production may be responsible for much more atmospheric methane than scientists previously thought, according to new research published today in the journal Nature. The results, if they hold, suggest that methane needs to be managed even more tightly than was accounted for in multilateral initiatives such as the 2015 Paris Agreement — not to mention many policies on the national and local level.

Scientists aren’t challenging the top-line amount of fossil methane that enters the atmosphere every year — that number stays at about 194 million metric tons, says Benjamin Hmiel, a postdoctoral fellow in Earth science at the University of Rochester and the study’s lead author. Rather, they’re challenging how much of the total comes from natural versus industrial sources, an important distinction for policymakers.

Conventional wisdom has held until now that fossil sources emit roughly 50 million tons of methane. The new paper’s estimate is dramatically smaller: Just 5 million tons, at most, come from natural sources, or “seeps,” the study says. “If it’s not coming from seeps, then it’s coming from fossil-fuel operations,” says Rob Jackson, a Stanford professor of Earth system science who wasn’t involved in the study. “There’s really no other explanation for it. It’s kind of a zero-sum game.”

The Nature study takes advantage of a rare, radioactive form of the carbon atom that decays over several thousand years. Carbon-14 is present in trace amounts in the biosphere, embedded in naturally occurring molecules such as methane and carbon dioxide, but fossil fuels have no carbon-14 in them. Hmiel and his colleagues visited Greenland three times over two years to drill samples out of ice sheets dating back 300 years, then analyzed the gases trapped in them looking for carbon-14. This allowed scientists to establish a pre-industrial level for natural methane emissions.

Methane is a powerful heat-trapping gas — about 25 times more powerful than carbon dioxide over a period of 100 years — but because it’s not as abundant as carbon dioxide it has a lower climate effect overall. The largest component of natural gas, methane makes up about 17% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Lately, investor and activist pressure on oil and gas companies has led to ambitious climate-related pronouncements. BP PLC, for instance, pledged just last week to stop emissions from its own operations and production by 2050.

The new work widens a debate that stems from two opposing methods researchers use to measure methane: ice-core research and local monitoring of methane sources. Reconciling these two approaches will take some time, says Stefan Schwietzke, environmental scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund, which has conducted independent methane monitoring in the U.S. and is now expanding that work overseas. “We’re expecting that a lot more data will come out over the next few years,” he says. “That will also get at the question, how big are the oil and gas industry methane emissions internationally?”

The Nature paper builds on earlier work suggesting that natural methane emissions may be dramatically lower than previously indicated, and has triggered self-examination among some of the same scientists who’d produced the earlier, lower estimates. The new evidence comes as deadlines loom for next year’s United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, the group’s sixth major assessment since 1990. The Global Carbon Project, an international research collaboration that Jackson chairs, is finishing up its own review of the Earth’s methane budget, expected this spring.

Jackson says that geologists and climate modelers will have to weigh in on the paper before it passes muster and the new numbers really become a headache for the policy community. “Scientists will check this quickly,” he adds. “It’s an important result.”

Hmiel is ready for them.

“I’m sure I’m going to get comments from the geologic community, arguing against my results, and I look forward to that,” he says. “That’s how science advances.”

Court strikes down Kern County’s industry-friendly system for approving oil drilling

Pump jacks dot the landscape in the Cymric oil field near McKittrick in Kern County

By ASSOCIATED PRESS
FEB. 26, 2020 8:38 AM

FRESNO —  A California county that pumps most of the state’s oil and has issued more than 1,000 drilling permits in five years violated state environmental laws, a state appeals court ruled Tuesday in a victory for environmentalists who argued the permit system threatened the region’s air and water.
The 5th District Court of Appeal gave Kern County 30 days to stop issuing permits until the county can correct violations of the California Environmental Quality Act, the court said.

The county declined to comment Tuesday because attorneys were still studying the 150-page decision, Kern County Chief Administrative Officer Ryan Alsop told KGET-TV.

California is the third-largest producer of crude oil in the United States and Kern County accounts for about 70% of the state’s oil production and nearly 80% of its gas production as of 2018, according to state statistics. The county has allowed wells to be constructed next to people’s homes in towns such as Arvin, a focus of a recent Los Angeles Times special report.

The county, which is in California’s agricultural Central Valley, also struggles with bad air quality because of ozone and dust. It also has water demands that require importing water and pumping groundwater.

A 2015 amendment to the county’s zoning code allowed the county to grant approval of new oil and gas extraction permits after a review that determined the application would meet requirements of a blanket environmental impact report, or EIR.

Environmentalists argued that the ordinance was designed to bypass a serious review process and instead rubber-stamp tens of thousands of new wells over the next 25 years.

A lower court struck down most arguments against the ordinance, but the appellate court found that the ordinance relied on a flawed EIR that failed to properly address pollution issues involving water, agricultural land and noise.

The ordinance was designed to streamline permitting and avoid costly and time-consuming environmental reviews of individual wells and it was approved “despite its significant, adverse environmental impacts,” the appellate court ruling said.

“The ordinance’s basic purpose is the acceleration of oil and gas development and the economic benefits that might be achieved by that development,” the ruling said. “Its basic purpose is not the protection of the environment.”

The court ordered the county to set aside the ordinance and to revise its EIR to fix the violations of state law before the county can reapprove the measure.

“This is a huge victory for our health and climate,” Hollin Kretzmann, an attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity, said in a statement. “The court ruled that Kern County violated the law when it fast-tracked more oil and gas development and hid the immense harm caused by drilling.”

“Oil and gas operations compete with families and farmers for scarce fresh water supplies and they pump deadly air pollutants into the Central Valley. Those impacts can’t be ignored,” said Colin O’Brien, an attorney with the group Earthjustice who argued the case.