Judges Hear Arguments in President Trump’s Biggest Climate Rollback

The Trump administration is seeking to repeal Obama-era regulations on emissions from power plants.

By Lisa Friedman
Oct. 8, 2020

WASHINGTON — A three-judge panel appeared divided Thursday on President Trump’s effort to repeal his predecessor’s regulations on planet-warming emissions from the power sector and replace them with far weaker controls.

The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia panel, with two judges named by President Barack Obama and one by President Trump, could well agree to block the Trump administration’s plan, but the issue is almost sure to reach the Supreme Court if Mr. Trump is re-elected.

Even if Mr. Trump loses next month, the arguments by the Environmental Protection Agency laid the groundwork for a protracted legal war over future administrations’ ability to cut the pollution responsible for climate change from the power sector, the country’s second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions.

At stake is whether the Trump administration can lock in an extremely narrow interpretation of the Clean Air Act by persuading judges that the federal government does not have the authority to set national restrictions on carbon emissions or force states to move away from coal-fired power.

If it succeeds, a Biden administration would be stripped of a key regulatory weapon to tackle the United States’ share of climate change. In that sense, Thursday’s oral arguments also highlighted the stakes around the confirmation of Judge Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court, which would give conservatives a clear 6-3 majority.

“The Trump administration has really taken a go-for-broke approach,” said Joseph Goffman, executive director of Harvard University Law School’s Environmental & Energy Law Program and a former E.P.A. official under President Barack Obama.

If the administration’s arguments prevail, he said, “Then they’ve really advanced a broader project that the Trump administration has been pursuing to not only repeal individual rules, but to narrow the foundation of the federal government in doing any kind of regulation.”

The plaintiffs in the case before the court, the American Lung Association v. E.P.A., include more than two dozen states and cities, a coalition of public health and environmental groups and nine power companies.

In more than six hours of deeply technical arguments over remote computer links, the groups argued that the Trump administration’s new regulation, known as the Affordable Clean Energy rule, does virtually nothing to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and will actually lead to a dangerous increase in other pollutants. That, they maintained, violates the agency’s legal obligation to take action to reduce greenhouse gases.

The two judges named to the panel by Mr. Obama, Patricia Ann Millett and Cornelia Pillard, appeared skeptical of the Trump administration’s argument that the Clean Air Act forbids the E.P.A. from doing anything structurally to change the power sector’s emissions trajectory. “I’m a little bit puzzled by the position of the government here,” Judge Pillard told Jonathan D. Brightbill, an attorney for the Justice Department defending the Trump administration’s plan.

The agency maintains the act allows it only to set guidelines to reduce emissions at individual power plants with actions like increasing efficiency or upgrading boilers that do not threaten an entire power sector.

The judge nominated by Mr. Trump, Justin Reed Walker, asserted that Congress failed to pass climate legislation in 2009 in part because it would burden coal-reliant states, just as Mr. Obama’s regulation, called the Clean Power Plan, would have. Judge Walker, a protégé of Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, is from coal-dependent Kentucky.

“This policy that we are stuck adjudicating today and that the E.P.A. promulgated was debated in Congress,” Judge Walker erroneously stated. (Legislation passed by the House but not the Senate would have enacted a cap-and-trade system to drive down emissions across the economy, and was very different from the Clean Power Plan.)

Steven C. Wu, an attorney representing the plaintiffs, responded, “The fact that Congress did not enact a far more aggressive program for dealing with climate change does not foreclose the E.P.A.’s ability to deal with the harmful effects of power plant emissions.”

More than five years ago the D.C. Circuit considered many of the same legal questions when it heard arguments over the Clean Power Plan.

That regulation set a goal of cutting power-sector emissions 32 percent by 2030, relative to 2005, and was the cornerstone of the United States’ pledge to the Paris Agreement, an international accord on climate change.

Mr. Obama’s approach sparked fierce opposition because the E.P.A. assumed utilities could meet their regulatory burdens by taking actions beyond upgrades to individual plants, such as by replacing coal plants entirely with wind turbines or solar panels elsewhere.

Twenty-eight states and several major industry groups sued the Obama administration to overturn the rule.

Mr. Trump called the regulation “stupid” and accused the Obama administration of pursuing a “war on coal.”

But the Clean Power Plan never went into effect. The Supreme Court in 2016 said states did not have to comply until all litigation had been resolved, and when the Trump administration in 2019 finalized its revised version, those lawsuits became moot.

Since then, the Trump administration has weakened limits on methane emissions from oil and gas wells, allowed an increase in vehicle tailpipe pollution and eased rules to allow new coal-fired power plants to come online.

The administration’s own projections for the Affordable Clean Energy rule estimate it will reduce emissions from power plants by less than one percent when fully implemented in 2030, compared to no regulation at all.

Joseph R. Biden Jr. has vowed to eliminate fossil fuel emissions from the power sector by 2035, though he has not detailed how he would achieve that. Energy experts said no matter what the courts ultimately decide, Mr. Biden would be more likely to turn to Congress than revisit the Clean Power Plan model.

“If I’m the general counsel of a Biden E.P.A., I know that if I do a souped-up version of the Clean Power Plan that it’s almost certain to go to the Supreme Court and it’s almost certain to lose,” said Jeffrey R. Holmstead, an attorney for the electric utility industry who served in the E.P.A. under the second President George Bush.

Ultimately, he said, the court machinations “really does force Congress’ hand” to decide whether it can pass a clean energy standard or other legislation to force a serious change in the emissions trajectory of the United States.

Meantime Mr. Trump’s plan has done little to achieve one of the administration’s top goals: save the coal industry from decline.

Under Trump, Criminal Prosecutions for Pollution Dropped Sharply
A new report finds an “alarming” drop in prosecutions over violations of the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act, fundamental environmental laws.



An emissions compliance test at the California Air Resources Board Haagen-Smit Laboratory in El Monte, Calif., in 2015. A 2017 ruling ordered Volkswagon to pay a $2.8 billion criminal fine for cheating on emissions standards tests.
An emissions compliance test at the California Air Resources Board Haagen-Smit Laboratory in El Monte, Calif., in 2015. A 2017 ruling ordered Volkswagon to pay a $2.8 billion criminal fine for cheating on emissions standards tests.Credit...Patrick T. Fallon/Bloomberg
John Schwartz
By John Schwartz
Oct. 13, 2020
Prosecutions of environmental crimes have “plummeted” during the Trump administration, according to a new report.

The first two years of the Trump administration had a 70 percent decrease in criminal prosecutions under the Clean Water Act and a decrease of more than 50 percent under the Clean Air Act, the Environmental Crimes Project at the University of Michigan law school found.

The research examined cases brought between 2005 and 2018, and the two-year period starting in 2017 had “the worst pollution prosecution numbers in the 14 years covered by our study,” said David M. Uhlmann the author of the study. He presented the paper at the American Bar Association fall environmental conference; it will be published in the Michigan Journal of Environmental and Administrative law. Mr. Uhlmann, the director of the environmental law and policy program at the University of Michigan law school, worked for 17 years in the Department of Justice, during the presidential administrations of both Bushes and Bill Clinton, and was the top prosecutor of environmental crimes at the Department of Justice from 2000 to 2007.

Civil prosecutions have also dropped significantly during the Trump years, and the administration has abandoned the longstanding practice of using settlements of environmental cases to require polluters to address past and future pollution issues with what are known as supplemental environmental projects.

The drop in prosecutions occurs within the larger context of President Trump’s hostility toward government regulation in general and environmental regulation in particular. During the 2016 campaign, he promised to reduce the E.P.A. to “little tidbits.” Since his election, the administration has tried to roll back 100 environmental regulations, though many of these initiatives have not fared well in the courts.

The analysis notes that resources for environmental prosecutions have long been under pressure at the federal level, which has led to a gradual drop in the number of prosecutions, even during the Obama administration. The number of defendants dropped from 191 in 2011 to 106 in 2014.

“Under President Donald J. Trump the bottom fell out,” Mr. Uhlmann wrote, “with just 90 defendants prosecuted during 2017, and 75 defendants prosecuted during 2018.” In 2018, the administration charged only nine defendants under the Clean Water Act.

After gathering the data, he wrote in the paper, he had not expected to see such an “alarming” drop in prosecutions.

Environmental prosecution is a partnership between the E.P.A., which investigates misconduct, and the Justice Department, which pursues the civil and criminal lawsuits. Both agencies disputed Mr. Uhlmann’s findings.

Jeffrey Bossert Clark, who heads the environment and natural resources division of the Justice Department, said through a spokeswoman that the article “paints a misleading picture” of the administration’s approach and “confuses quantity for quality.”

He said that while there has been a decline in water pollution cases, the number of pesticide cases has risen by “several hundred percent” with investigations of illegal smuggling and “fraudulent COVID-19 remedies,” and that prosecutors have pursued “large, high-impact cases involving gross violations of our environmental laws,” including major cases involving fraud in auto emissions. He concluded, “Our prosecutors are as busy in this Administration as they were in prior administrations, and our nation’s air and water are the cleanest they have ever been.”

Mr. Uhlmann responded that “the numbers don’t lie,” and noted that 10 defendants were prosecuted for pesticide violations in 2017 and 2018, an increase of just two defendants over 2015 and 2016. If the numbers have grown since then, he said, even a several hundred percent rise “would not offset the far larger decline in Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act prosecutions, both of which are far more significant from an environmental protection standpoint.”

He also said that the median size of fines in general has fallen, and the number of felony prosecutions — a measure of the seriousness of the crimes — has dropped steeply. To Mr. Uhlmann, that means that “pollution prosecutions under President Trump have fallen dramatically from his predecessors, both in terms of quantity and quality.” As for the emissions cases, he noted, those started under the Obama administration.

A spokeswoman for the E.P.A. said that the agency “has reinvigorated its criminal enforcement program” and “reversed the downward trend” in cases. New cases, she said, increased “about 46 percent” between fiscal year 2017 and 2019, and that the agency expects the number of cases opened in fiscal year 2020 “to be more than double the number opened in 2017.”

Mr. Uhlmann said that citing new investigations in 2019 and 2020 does not change the “devastatingly low” number of people charged in the administration’s first two years, especially since “a significant number of investigations never result in criminal charges.”

A former regional administrator for the E.P.A., Judith Enck, said that Mr. Uhlmann’s paper illustrates the broader trend for the administration, which “acts like our bedrock environmental laws are simply suggestions. This approach will result in more pollution and more damage to health,” she said, and called the situation “unconscionable.”

Jeffrey R. Holmstead, who served as an E.P.A. official during the presidency of George W. Bush, said he doubted the decline was intentional on the part of the administration. “I would suspect it’s not based on any effort to go easy on criminals, or environmental scofflaws,” he said. “I think it’s a reflection of the fact that they were not prepared to take over the reins of government.” He noted that critical officials who would oversee such prosecutions were not in place until the end of 2018.

“I’m not saying I hold the administration harmless here,” he said, but “it’s hard to accomplish very much when you’re sort of in a holding pattern.”

Correction: Oct. 13, 2020
Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the years David M. Uhlmann referred to as having "the worst pollution prosecution numbers in the 14 years covered by our study." The period started in 2017, not 2016.
