Trump Signs Landmark Land Conservation Bill
The bipartisan Great American Outdoors Act guarantees funding for federal land use efforts. The president claimed credit for Republicans.


“From an environmental standpoint and from just the beauty of our country standpoint, there hasn’t been anything like this since Teddy Roosevelt, I suspect,” President Trump said at a bill-signing ceremony at the White House on Tuesday.
“From an environmental standpoint and from just the beauty of our country standpoint, there hasn’t been anything like this since Teddy Roosevelt, I suspect,” President Trump said at a bill-signing ceremony at the White House on Tuesday.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times
Annie Karni
By Annie Karni
Published Aug. 4, 2020
Updated Aug. 5, 2020

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Tuesday signed into law the Great American Outdoors Act, a measure with broad bipartisan support that guarantees maximum annual funding for a federal program to acquire and preserve land for public use.

Mr. Trump — who has exited the Paris Agreement on climate change, loosened restrictions on toxic air pollution and removed climate change from a list of national security threats — heralded the new law as a groundbreaking environmental achievement that he deserved credit for.

“From an environmental standpoint and from just the beauty of our country standpoint, there hasn’t been anything like this since Teddy Roosevelt, I suspect,” he said at a bill-signing ceremony at the White House.

“At some point, they’ll have to start thinking about the Republican Party and all of the incredible things we’ve done on conservation and many other fronts,” Mr. Trump said.

The act, which allocates $900 million a year to the Land and Water Conservation Fund and provides up to $9.5 billion over five years to begin clearing up a maintenance backlog at national parks, was approved on a 310-to-107 vote in the House. It was introduced by Representative Joe Cunningham, Democrat of South Carolina.

But no Democrats were invited to the signing ceremony, which was attended by six Republican senators and three Republican congressmen, in addition to senior administration officials. Mr. Trump did not mention Mr. Cunningham or any of his Democratic colleagues in his remarks.

When asked why Democrats were not invited or acknowledged, Kayleigh McEnany, the White House press secretary, said that “the only thing we’re recognizing about congressional Democrats right now is how appalling it is that there are Americans going who are going without paychecks because they refuse to partner with Martha McSally, Republicans and the president to make sure those payments go out."

Ms. McEnany was referring to the stalemate on Capitol Hill between Republicans, including Ms. McSally of Arizona, and Democrats as they negotiate another round of federal aid to address the coronavirus pandemic.

Mr. Trump was persuaded to support the bill by two Senate Republicans from Western states — Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado and Senator Steve Daines of Montana — who are facing tough re-election battles and saw the measure as helpful to their states and their electoral chances. Mr. Daines and Mr. Gardner met with the president last year and told him that signing the measure would give him a significant conservation legacy.

“That was a meeting that took place, and within about a minute, I was convinced,” Mr. Trump said on Tuesday. “And I wasn’t at all convinced before I walked in.”

Even as he tried to bill himself as an environmentalist with a legacy that would rival Mr. Roosevelt’s, the president also demonstrated a lack of familiarity with one of the country’s most famous national parks.

He bungled the pronunciation of Yosemite National Park in California, referring to it as “yo Semites" as he read from his prepared remarks, creating an instant viral moment that was mocked online by the Democratic National Committee.

And on the same day that Mr. Trump signed the measure, his eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., and Nick Ayers, a former chief of staff to Vice President Mike Pence, publicly expressed their opposition to the administration’s longtime efforts to open the Pebble Mine, a large gold and copper mine in Alaska.

Trump officials concluded last month that opening the mine would not pose serious environmental risks, a reversal of the Obama administration’s position. Mr. Ayers and the president’s son wrote on Twitter that they wanted Mr. Trump to direct the Environmental Protection Agency to block the Pebble Mine opening.

Citrus Flavoring Is Weaponized Against Insect-Borne Diseases

The E.P.A. has approved nootkatone, which is found in cedars and grapefruit. It repels ticks, mosquitoes and other dangerous bugs for hours, but is safe enough to eat.

One proposed use is in soaps that people in tick-infested areas could shower with, repelling and possibly killing ticks that try to attach to them.Credit...Bertrand Guay/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Donald G. McNeil Jr.
By Donald G. McNeil Jr.
Published Aug. 10, 2020
Updated Aug. 11, 2020

Adding a new weapon to the fight against insect-borne illnesses like Lyme disease and malaria, the Environmental Protection Agency on Monday approved a new chemical that both repels and kills ticks and mosquitoes.

The chemical, nootkatone, an oil found in cedar trees and grapefruits, is so safe that it is used by the food and perfume industries.

Nootkatone is considered nontoxic to humans and other mammals, birds, fish and bees, the E.P.A. said in a statement.

Diseases caused by the bites of ticks, mosquitoes and fleas have tripled in the United States in the last 15 years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a 2018 report. They include Lyme disease, anaplasmosis and Rocky Mountain spotted fever from ticks; West Nile, dengue, Zika and chikungunya from mosquitoes; and plague from fleas.

In tropical countries, malaria and yellow fever are major killers; elephantiasis is also spread by mosquitoes. Lethal Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever is spread by ticks, and kala azar is spread by sandflies.

Manuel F. Lluberas, a public health entomologist who has worked on mosquito-control campaigns all over the world, said he hoped that nootkatone would be accepted by people who fear synthetic repellents and that it could be made cheaply enough to be bought by foreign aid programs like the President’s Malaria Initiative.

The E.P.A. registration applies only to nootkatone as an active ingredient, the statement said. Any formulations using it in the future will have to be tested and registered separately.

The chemical repels mosquitoes, ticks, bedbugs and fleas — and, in high concentrations, kills them, according to the C.D.C. It may also be effective against lice, sandflies, midges and other pests, some of which can carry lethal diseases.

It is not oily, lasts for hours and has a pleasant grapefruit-like scent, said Ben Beard, deputy director of the division of vector-borne diseases at the C.D.C.

“If you drink Fresca or Squirt, you’ve drunk nootkatone,” Dr. Beard said.

Nootkatone works differently from previous classes of insecticides and can kill bugs that are resistant to DDT, pyrethroids and other common insecticides.

Experts in insect-borne diseases greeted the news with cautious enthusiasm.

“Its use as an insecticidal soap has great potential,” said Duane J. Gubler, a former C.D.C. chief of vector-borne diseases.

One proposed use is in soaps that people in tick-infested areas could shower with, repelling and possibly killing ticks that try to attach to them.

Joel R. Coats, a specialist in insect toxicology at Iowa State University, said his lab had tested nootkatone and found it to be “an impressive repellent but a weak insecticide.”

It repels ticks even better than synthetics like DEET, picaridin or IR3535 do, Dr. Coats said, and it is their equal at repelling mosquitoes.

Unlike citronella, peppermint oil, lemongrass oil and other repellents based on plant oils, he added, nootkatone does not lose its potency after about an hour, but lasts as long as the synthetics.

But although it can also kill insects, he said, doing that takes so much of the chemical that it may not be practical.

“Most plant terpenes will kill bugs if you go to a high enough dose, but I haven’t seen any data that supports using it as an insecticide,” Dr. Coats said, using a term for aromatic oils exuded by many plants to repel invasive insects. “I’ve seen lots of data on it as a repellent.”

Mikkel Vestergaard-Frandsen, owner of the Vestergaard company, which makes insecticide-impregnated nets to fight malaria, said he was interested in the compound, but wanted to know more about it.

Because babies sleep under the nets, any insecticide in them must be very safe.

In many areas, mosquitoes have developed resistance to the pyrethrin-based insecticides now used in nets, which are synthetic versions of a chemical found in chrysanthemum flowers.

A version of nootkatone that can linger in netting fabric for years would have to be developed, but good repellents usually dissolve too quickly for that, he said.

The C.D.C. discovered nootkatone’s repellent properties almost 25 years ago as part of a search for new tick-control compounds to fight Lyme disease, Dr. Beard said.

They investigated cedar bark and chips “because there are all these folk tales that cedar repels insects — and people keep their clothes in cedar chests,” he said.

Cedar wood itself had very little effect on ticks, he said, but Oregon State University scientists working with the agency found the terpene oil of the Alaskan yellow cedar to be powerfully repellent. The Latin name of the tree is Cupressus nootkatensis, which comes from the Nuu-Chah-Nulth people of Canada.


It is “not known in great detail” how nootkatone works, Dr. Beard said, but it appears to activate octopamine receptors, which in insects send electrical impulses from one nerve cell to the next. Unable to turn off the signal, the bugs twitch to death.

In mammals, adrenaline — which is chemically related to octopamine — performs the same function. But the compound does not trigger adrenaline receptors.

Later the agency realized that the same chemical, originally derived from grapefruit rinds, was used as a flavoring and in perfumes.

The C.D.C. licensed its patent to a Swiss company, Evolva, which isolates the chemical from fermenting yeast.

But doing the safety studies required for E.P.A. registration was too expensive until the 2015-2016 Zika epidemic came along, Dr. Beard said.

That epidemic prodded Congress to appropriate money for mosquito control, and the C.D.C. transferred some of it to BARDA, the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, which contracted with Evolva to finish the research.

Zika funding “was the key to moving the boulder up the hill,” Dr. Beard said. But since nootkatone works well on both insects, he added, “it wasn’t a bait-and-switch.”

