Trump, Citing Pandemic, Moves to Weaken Two Key Environmental Protections  

Twin environmental actions set for Thursday underscored the president’s push to roll back regulations as the coronavirus crisis continues.

By Coral Davenport and Lisa Friedman
June 4, 2020

WASHINGTON —  The Trump administration, in twin actions to curb environmental regulations, moved on Thursday to temporarily speed the construction of energy projects and to permanently weaken federal authority to issue stringent clean air and climate change rules.

President Trump signed an executive order that calls on agencies to waive required environmental reviews of infrastructure projects to be built during the pandemic-driven economic crisis. At the same time, the Environmental Protection Agency has proposed a new rule that changes the way the agency uses cost-benefit analyses to enact Clean Air Act regulations, effectively limiting the strength of future air pollution controls.

Together, the actions signal that Mr. Trump intends to speed up his efforts to dismantle environmental regulations as the nation battles the coronavirus and a wave of unrest protesting the deaths of black Americans in Georgia, Minnesota and Kentucky. They will also help define the stakes in the 2020 presidential election, since neither effort would likely survive a Democratic victory.

By changing the way the government weighs the value of the public health benefits, Andrew Wheeler, the E.P.A. administrator, would allow the agency to justify weakening clean air and climate change regulations with economic arguments.

Mr. Trump’s executive order would use “emergency authorities” to waive parts of the cornerstone National Environmental Policy Act to spur the construction of highways, pipelines and other infrastructure projects. Environmental activists and lawyers questioned the legality of the move and accused the administration of using the coronavirus pandemic and national unrest to speed up actions that have been moving slowly through the regulatory process.

“When it comes to trying to unravel this nations’ environmental protection laws, this administration never sleeps,” said Richard Lazarus, professor of environmental law at Harvard University.

Fossil fuel companies have long asserted that the economic formulas used by the federal government to justify pollution controls have unfairly harmed them. During the Obama administration, the E.P.A. drafted a rule to limit toxic mercury pollution from power plants, estimating that it would cost the electric utility industry $9.6 billion a year. But an initial analysis found that reducing mercury would save just $6 million annually in health costs.

To justify that stark imbalance, the Obama administration found an additional $80 billion in health “co-benefits” from the incidental reduction of soot and nitrogen oxide that would occur as side effects of controlling mercury.

Last month, the Trump administration completed a rollback of that Obama mercury rule that discounted such co-benefits.

Now, Mr. Wheeler has proposed extending that measure by eliminating or reducing the emphasis on co-benefits across all new Clean Air Act regulations. This year, he is expected to propose a similar revamp of the cost-benefit formulas that govern clean water and chemical safety regulations.

Mr. Wheeler said that the E.P.A. would still calculate the economic value of such co-benefits. But he said those calculation would no longer be used in defending rules. “Co-benefits would not be used to justify the rule,” he said in a telephone call with reporters, noting specifically that the change would mean that regulations like the Obama-era mercury rule would no longer be defensible.

“The way the Obama administration used co-benefits to calculate the mercury rule and other rules — they were playing a shell game,” he said.

Historically, the economic costs of regulating pollutants such as mercury or planet-warming greenhouse gases often do outweigh the direct benefits. But such rules also tend to lower emissions of another deadly pollutant: fine industrial soot, also known as particulate matter.

By reducing emissions of the tiny, lung damaging particles known as PM 2.5, clean air rules that are primarily aimed at controlling different pollutants can have the effect of saving thousands of lives by lowering rates of asthma and lung disease. And, last month, researchers at Harvard released the first nationwide study linking long-term exposure to PM 2.5 and Covid-19 death rates.

“At a time when more than 100,000 Americas have died from Covid and we know about this connection, the Trump administration is going to put in place some analytical techniques that will make it easier for them to kill more Americans,” said Richard Revesz, an expert on environmental law at New York University.

Mr. Revesz and others said the change also defies the intent of the landmark Clean Air Act of 1970.

“These economic cost-benefit analyses have been an important driver of Clean Air Act regulations for 40 years,” said Richard Morgenstern, a former E.P.A. official who served from the Reagan to the Clinton administrations. “What this rule is doing is altering the math in such a way to potentially downplay the economic benefit to public health, so they are justified in writing weaker rules in the future.”

Allies of Mr. Trump applauded that prospect.

“This helps the Trump agenda because it limits E.P.A.’s freedom to push out new regulations,” said Steven J. Milloy, a member of Mr. Trump’s E.P.A. transition team and author of the book “Scare Pollution: Why and How to Fix the E.P.A.”

The fossil fuel industry expressed support for the move.  “Through administrator Wheeler’s proposal, E.P.A. must now be consistent and transparent with the data and analysis used to justify decisions in its rule-making efforts,” said Anne Bradbury, chief executive of the American Exploration and Production Council, which represents oil and gas companies. “These reforms help to avoid federal rules that could otherwise hurt American workers, businesses and our economy.”

The future of Thursday’s actions will depend on the outcome of this November’s election. If former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. defeats Mr. Trump and is inaugurated before the draft rule is made final, a process that can easily take up to a year, his administration could simply discard the E.P.A. proposal. If the rule is made final, but Mr. Biden wins the White House and Democrats take control of the Senate, they could use the Congressional Review Act to quickly undo the Trump-era regulation.

The act, almost never used until Mr. Trump took office, allows Congress to nullify any regulation that has been in place for fewer than 60 legislative days.

Thursday’s executive order would be even more vulnerable, since it could be undone with a new president’s signature.

Citing more than 41 million people out of work because of Covid-19, Mr. Trump said “Without intervention, the United States faces the likelihood of a potentially protracted economic recovery with persistent high unemployment.”

He said the need for his administration’s deregulatory agenda was “all the more acute now” and claimed regulatory delays would continue to keep millions of Americans out of work.

The order calls on the secretaries of the Transportation Department, the Department of Agriculture, the Department of the Interior, the Defense Department and the head of the Army Corps of Engineers, to “use all relevant emergency and other authorities” to expedite infrastructure projects. They must report back to the White House within 30 days with a list of all projects that have been fast-tracked.

Mr. Lazarus, the Harvard professor, noted that the environmental policy act provides for federal agencies to consult with the White House on whether “emergency circumstances” make it necessary to waive requirements, but does not give power to waive environmental requirements.

“The president’s assertion of authority to waive the application of environmental laws in the way described seems wholly untethered from law,” Mr. Lazarus said.

Democratic leaders said the administration’s actions would be particularly harmful to communities of color.

“By signing this executive order, Donald Trump is muzzling the voice of environmental justice communities, and continues to make clear his total disregard for those speaking out and fighting for racial justice and a sustainable environment,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York said in a statement.

The Trump administration aimed to dismantle parts of the National Environmental Policy Act long before the coronavirus pandemic hit the United States. In January Mr. Trump released a plan to weaken the law. That measure, which is expected to be finalized this month, would no longer take climate change into account when federal agencies weigh the environmental consequences of infrastructure projects.

The Club for Growth, a free-market group, applauded the move and called it “bold action” to “get our country back to work faster.” The Center for Biological Diversity, an environmental group, accused the administration of “exploiting the pandemic.”

E.P.A. Won’t Regulate Toxic Compound Linked to Fetal Brain Damage
The move was widely expected after The New York Times reported last month that the agency’s administrator had decided to effectively defy a court order.


Andrew Wheeler, the E.P.A. administrator, during a Senate committee hearing last month.
Andrew Wheeler, the E.P.A. administrator, during a Senate committee hearing last month.Credit...Pool photo by Al Drago
Lisa FriedmanCoral Davenport
By Lisa Friedman and Coral Davenport
June 18, 2020

WASHINGTON — The Trump administration on Thursday finalized a decision not to impose any limits on perchlorate, a toxic chemical compound found in rocket fuel that contaminates water and has been linked to fetal and infant brain damage.

The move by the Environmental Protection Agency was widely expected, after The New York Times reported last month that Andrew Wheeler, the E.P.A. administrator, had decided to effectively defy a court order that required the agency to establish a safe drinking-water standard for the chemical by the end of June. In addition to not regulating, the E.P.A. overturned the underlying scientific finding that declared perchlorate a serious health risk for five million to 16 million people in the United States.

The E.P.A. said California and Massachusetts and other states had already taken regulatory steps to reduce the contamination.

“Today’s decision is built on science and local success stories and fulfills President Trump’s promise to pare back burdensome ‘one-size-fits-all’ overregulation for the American people,” Mr. Wheeler said in a statement. “State and local water systems are effectively and efficiently managing levels of perchlorate. Our state partners deserve credit for their leadership on protecting public health in their communities, not unnecessary federal intervention.”

Environmentalists said both moves showed a disregard for science, the law and public health, and they criticized the agency for claiming credit for state regulations done in the face of federal inaction.

“Today’s decision is illegal, unscientific and unconscionable,” said Erik D. Olson, the senior strategic director for health at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an advocacy group. “The Environmental Protection Agency is threatening the health of pregnant moms and young children with toxic chemicals in their drinking water at levels that literally can cause loss of I.Q. points. Is this what the Environmental Protection Agency has come to?”

The battle over perchlorate dates back to the early 2000s, when the George W. Bush administration decided not to regulate it. The Obama administration reversed that decision.

In 2011 the Obama administration issued a finding that perchlorate posed such a serious health risk when discharged into drinking water that it required regulation, setting off a fierce lobbying effort by defense contractors to block restrictions on using the contaminant.

The Trump administration again reversed the decision and additionally overturned the health finding, saying it was “not in the public interest” to regulate the contaminant.

It justified reversing the health finding by arguing that new analyses have found that perchlorate must be at higher concentrations in the water than previously thought to be unsafe. And, because states with perchlorate contamination problems have regulated on their own, fewer public water systems now contain perchlorate at high levels, so the costs of nationwide monitoring would outweigh the benefits.

The American Academy of Pediatrics, which had told the E.P.A. that perchlorate can cause a significant drop in the I.Q. of newborns, had urged the “strongest possible” limits on the contaminant.