People can’t agree on what to do about Florida’s herpes-infected monkeys

By 
Hannah Knowles

Feb. 25, 2020 at 7:09 p.m. EST

The monkeys — just six of them — arrived in the 1930s as tourist attractions, confined to an island in a Central Florida river.

The problem: They could swim.

The furry, pink-faced creatures native to Asia soon spread and multiplied in what is now Silver Springs State Park, capturing the hearts of visitors who traveled the lush river in glass-bottom boats — and confounding conservationists who want to rein them in.

They’re adorable but undeniably invasive. Experts worry their growing ranks will hurt other species. And to top it off, many of the monkeys carry a form of herpes virus.

The debate about whether and how to control the 4,000-acre park’s rhesus macaques has reignited in recent weeks after a spate of far-flung monkey sightings brought alarm and blaring headlines: “They’re here!” one news station declared after the animals showed up as far as 100 miles north in Jacksonville. But park officials are no longer trying to tamp down the macaque population.



It’s a testament, researchers say, to the messy problem of managing an invasive species that has become a tourist highlight complete with its own urban legend. (The monkeys did not escape from the set of a Tarzan movie.)

“People feel really emotionally connected to these animals,” said Jane Anderson, an assistant professor of research at the Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute who has studied the monkeys’ growth over the years. “And that makes it much harder to convey that we need to implement population management than [for] an animal that’s less cute and cuddly.”

Rhesus macaques have been known to wreak havoc on new habitats. In Puerto Rico, studies note, their introduction in the 1960s destroyed seabird populations as the monkeys devoured eggs. In the early 2000s, the island territory’s Agriculture Department found that commercial farms were losing millions of dollars because of macaques and another monkey species.



Anderson estimates 550 to 600 macaques now living in northern Central Florida and frets that more growth could bring serious consequences for area birds such as quails.

The macaque population along Florida’s Silver River had ballooned to nearly 400 by 1984, according to a paper by Anderson and her colleagues. About a thousand of the area’s monkeys were trapped and sold for biomedical research over the next several decades, they write, as people grew concerned they might be plundering birds’ nests and could pass their virus on to humans. The macaques’ herpes B has only been transmitted to people in the lab — but in the rare cases that humans get the virus, it can be deadly.

The trapping and selling drew its own backlash, however, from animal rights groups and others concerned for the monkeys’ welfare.



“It is a tragedy that wild monkeys are torn from their families and forest homes and sold to research and testing laboratories,” one animal rights organization’s spokesman said in 2013, calling on officials to catch and sterilize instead, as the Ocala Star-Banner reported.

But sterilization is expensive, researchers say, and budgets are tight. Steven Johnson, an academic who advocates cutting the monkey population, acknowledges there is no easy solution now that the macaques have made themselves at home.

“What do you do with the monkeys?” the University of Florida associate professor told The Washington Post. “If you bring them out alive, something has to be done with them.”

Other less lovable invasive Florida species, such as the Burmese python, are far easier to cull without raising a public outcry, Johnson said.



And so, since 2012, efforts to thin Silver River’s monkeys have stopped. Instead of trying to manage the population, officials warn tourists to keep their distance.

“We tell people not to approach them, not to feed them, because we want people to stay safe,” said Craig Littauer, a park services specialist. He emphasized that the monkeys are just one of a host of local wild animals, from black bears to bobcats, that can act unpredictably.

The Florida Park Service posts signs and fliers reminding people to “keep a safe distance” from wildlife, and staff may temporarily close areas where they spot monkeys during morning “safety and maintenance checks,” said Weesam Khoury, a spokesperson for the Florida Department of Environmental Protection.

Please do not feed Florida’s monkeys. Some carry disease that can kill you.

It wasn’t always illegal to feed the macaques. That policy came in 2018, as state authorities warned the monkey population was spilling beyond the park, which sits just a 20-minute drive from the city of Ocala.



Monkey attacks — including one captured in a viral video — had raised concerns about aggression toward visitors. A study published in a journal of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had also fueled worries about herpes B, describing a “public health concern” while concluding that up to 30 percent of Silver Spring State Park’s macaques shed the virus in their saliva, urine and feces.

People can get herpes B from an infected monkey via a scratch, bite or contact with the monkey’s eyes, nose and mouth, according to the CDC. The virus brings symptoms much like those of the flu, but they can escalate to brain damage or death in humans if they remain untreated.

Experts caution that such human cases are rare. There is one recorded case of the virus spreading person-to-person.

Carli Segelson, a spokeswoman for the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, told The Post in an email at the time of the new monkey feeding ban that the commission “supports active management” but did not give specifics.



While she said the macaques have “bitten or scratched multiple people in Florida,” authorities have yet to record an instance of the monkeys passing their herpes B to humans in the wild.

The commission is “working with our partners to explore possible options to remove the threat of free-roaming monkeys in Florida,” Segelson wrote back in 2018. But researchers say there has been no movement since, and Segelson referred questions about monkey removals to the state’s Department of Environmental Protection.

The primates appear alluring as ever to park patrons.

“First thing everyone asks about is the monkeys,” Nick Bozman, who transports tourists on the river, told the Ocala Star-Banner recently. “They are good for my business.”

He knows there are costs, too.

“They are not supposed to be here,” he told the paper. “It’s a double-edged sword.”

Karin Brulliard contributed to this report.

The Energy 202: Martin Luther King III urges South Carolina voters to consider environmental inequality

By 
Paulina Firozi

Feb. 27, 2020 at 8:16 a.m. EST

THE LIGHTBULB

Martin Luther King III says South Carolina voters concerned about inequality in their communities should consider candidates' climate positions as they head to the polls this weekend. 

The human rights advocate and eldest son of Martin Luther King Jr. talked about the link between air pollution and asthma, growing concerns about water quality and frequent flooding at a Saturday forum of local leaders and activists days before the primary in South Carolina. 

King told The Energy 202 he wanted to get residents engaged “specifically around environmental justice and climate change, issues that disproportionately affect poor communities, and especially in South Carolina, African American communities.” 

He's hoping more people will be inspired to vote in this Saturday's contest in the state, where nearly two-thirds of expected Democratic voters are black.


King said the deluges in Charleston, which experienced 89 coastal flood events last year — more flooding than any other year on record – are especially concerning. 



“I don’t even know how people made it with 90 days of flooding last year in Charleston. I mean, that just says there’s a real problem with climate and we’ve got to find a way to address it,” said King. 

John Tynan, executive director of the Conservation Voters of South Carolina, said conversations at the town hall that his group co-hosted show the pervasiveness of climate issues in the state.  

“From the mountains all the way down to the coast, voters are seeing the impacts on a daily basis and we are seeing more discussion and more calls from voters for leadership to act on climate — both our local leaders and our national leaders,” he told The Energy 202. 

Calls for action in the first-in-the-South primary state underline the ways climate change has emerged as a key issue for voters. This is reflected in every state so far in the Democratic presidential primary season. 



As The Post’s Brady Dennis reported last week, climate change — once considered an afterthought — is now at the top of many voters’ minds. 

Polls out of the early-contest states back this up. 

In Nevada, an entrance poll conducted by Edison Media Research found a quarter of Democratic caucus-goers said climate change was their top issue. Before that, exit polls in New Hampshire found 25 percent of Democratic primary voters said it was their most important issue — especially notable after exit polls there didn’t mention climate change in 2016. And entrance polls during the Iowa caucuses found voters ranked climate change as their second-most important issue. 

This is reflected in candidates' messages. “Democratic hopefuls are talking about the problem more than ever on the campaign trail, bemoaning Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris climate accord and bashing his relentless rollback of U.S. environmental regulations,” Dennis wrote. 



The issue is top of mind nationally, too. As Dennis wrote: “A survey from the Pew Research Center released this month showed that a majority of Americans say combating climate change should be a key focus for the president. Nearly two-thirds of Americans also call environmental protection a top policy priority — ranking the issue almost as high as economic concerns.” 

That’s in part why advocates and lawmakers say they were shocked to not hear any specific questions about climate issues during Tuesday night’s debate in Charleston.

“The debate moderators missed a critical opportunity to connect issues voters are dealing with on a day-to-day basis to the candidates they’re trying to decide between,” Tynan said.

Rep. Joe Cunningham (D-S.C.) called it a “glaring hole in the discussion” that “needs to be filled.” 



“We’re sitting at sea level [Tuesday] night, an area that’s becoming flooded more and more frequently,” he told The Energy 202. “ … This is something up close and personal for us. South Carolinians deserve to know what the candidates’ plans are to address climate change, what their vision is.”


While voters are weighing many issues alongside climate change and environmental justice, Tynan said Democratic voters especially are paying close attention to what candidates are saying on the topic. 

“Environmental and climate action are baked into the culture of South Carolina voters, baked into the values, and if the voters don’t see that candidates recognize there’s a flooding problem, that offshore drilling is a problem, and have a plan to address it, they’ll have concerns supporting a candidate,” he said. 



King said there’s an opportunity for candidates to talk to voters directly about their climate vision ahead of Saturday’s primary. He pointed to events in South Carolina, where he said hundreds came out to discuss environmental justice. “If you can bring out that many people, there’s clearly a problem,” he said. 

“Most candidates have a position on their websites, but that doesn’t necessarily mean the community knows what they’re proposing,” he said. “ … I believe if it’s an issue they directly talk about, it would even increase the number of people who come out and vote.” 

You are reading The Energy 202, our must-read tipsheet on energy and the environment.
Not a regular subscriber?


POWER PLAYS
— White House plan would cut energy aid to help tackle coronavirus: A Trump administration proposal would shift $37 million from the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program — which helps veterans and elderly people pay for utility bills — to help cover the $2.5 billion plan to combat the coronavirus outbreak, E&E News reports, citing documents reviewed by the publication. Lawmakers allotted $3.7 billion for the energy aid program in fiscal year 2020. 



The reaction from some Democrats: “After dithering for weeks as the coronavirus spread around the world, the Trump administration has now decided to pay for its belated response by cutting funding for heating assistance for low-income families,” House Appropriations Committee spokesman Evan Hollander told E&E. 
Other money would have to move around: “Other funding would come from $535 million in funds marked for responding to the Ebola virus and shifting dollars from several Centers for Disease Control and Prevention programs, including environmental health.” 
— Staff objections to oil drilling safety rule changes revised: When the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement was finalizing revisions to a well-drilling safety rule, the agency’s director asked a staff engineer to remove language from memos that detailed objections from staff, the Wall Street Journal reports. Some memos indicated that staffers called for “no change to the testing frequency” of safety equipment. They also noted that staff disagreed with the industry on a protocol for managing well pressure. The notes were later changed. 

Why it matters: “The Trump administration has made no secret of its goal to reduce regulatory burdens on the oil industry. But the internal correspondence could prove a liability, as environmental groups challenge the agency’s rationale for its decision, legal experts say,” per the report.
What the agency says: A spokesman for Scott Angelle, director of the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, told the Journal the changes were properly handled.
— EPA conducting PFAS-related probes: The Environmental Protection Agency said it’s handling criminal investigations related to the toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, known as PFAS. The agency “acknowledged the probes in a new progress report on its 2019 PFAS Action Plan. The document says the agency ‘has multiple criminal investigations underway concerning PFAS-related pollution’ ” Bloomberg Environment reports. The agency did not provide additional information, telling Bloomberg it doesn’t comment on “ongoing or potential enforcement investigations.” 

The reaction: Earth & Water Law Group founder Brent Fewell, a former EPA official under President George W. Bush, said it was “not at all surprising” that EPA has signaled these investigations “given the heightened health concerns and public attention” on PFAS. “Multiple investigations clearly signals EPA is serious about understanding what the manufacturers knew about the chemicals’ toxicity and when they knew it,” Fewell told Bloomberg.
— Interior Dept. pursuing rule to limit what studies can be considered: The Interior Department is moving forward with a proposal that would enable the agency to consider scientific studies only if the underlying data is public, a move critics say would limit the ability to consider critical research, the Hill reports.



Where we’ve seen this before: “The proposal, dubbed the Promoting Open Science rule, mirrors a similar effort at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which critics argue would block that agency from considering renowned public health studies,” per the report.
What’s next: “Interior’s effort first surfaced as an order in October 2018, but the agency is now attempting to cement it as a rule, forwarding a proposal in mid-February to the White House Office of Management and Budget,” per the report. “The text of the rule is not yet public, but if finalized, critics fear it could hamstring future administrations from broadly considering science. Efforts to roll back the rule, if implemented, could take years.” 
OIL CHECK
— BP withdraws from three groups over climate: The oil giant announced its decision to leave three trade groups — the American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers, the Western Energy Alliance and the Western States Petroleum Association, The Post’s Steven Mufson reports.

What BP says: “The company said that it had conducted reviews of 30 of its relationships with trade groups. In addition to the three it left, BP said there were five other groups that were only ‘partially aligned’ with BP’s positions,” he adds. BP said its six-month review “acknowledges that some in society have lost trust in BP and the industry more widely because of seeming inconsistencies between public statements and lobbying and advocacy.” 
Hydrogen could be the future of driving—if California can fix the infrastructure
Automakers and California are spending millions to get and keep hydrogen fuel cells on the road. (Jonathan Baran/The Washington Post)
— Electric future: In California, there are about 8,000 early adopters of hydrogen-fuel-cell vehicles. They’re part of an “experiment by automakers, industry boosters and state officials to power an emissions-free driving future by turning to the universe’s most abundant element. The cars have electric motors, but are refueled with hydrogen in a style more like their gasoline-powered counterparts,” The Post’s Faiz Siddiqui reports. 

But: Despite a number of benefits, such as 300 to 400 miles per fill-up compared with 100-370 miles on a single charge for a plug-in vehicle, hydrogen-fueled cars have not caught up to their battery-electric counterparts. 
THERMOMETER
— How climate could increase global extreme weather costs: As the warming planet worsens floods, heat waves, droughts and other phenomenon, new research says climate change could increase global extreme weather costs by $100 billion by 2040. 

The details: The report from Cambridge University’s Climate Change Business Risk Index found “average direct costs of around $195 billion a year could rise to $234 billion by 2040,” according to Reuters, “an increase of $39 billion a year at today’s values, with the remainder taken up by indirect costs such as those from supply chain disruption.” 
DAYBOOK
Today

The House Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment holds a hearing on “Proposals for a Water Resources Development Act of 2020."