Engineers’ report bolsters proposed Mississippi pump project
Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Mo., speaks during a Senate Environment and Public Works Committee oversight hearing to examine the Environmental Protection Agency, Wednesday, May 20, 2020 on Capitol Hill in Washington. (Al Drago/Pool via AP)
Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Mo., speaks during a Senate Environment and Public Works Committee oversight hearing to examine the Environmental Protection Agency, Wednesday, May 20, 2020 on Capitol Hill in Washington. (Al Drago/Pool via AP) (Associated Press)

By Emily Wagster Pettus | AP
Oct. 16, 2020 at 5:42 p.m. EDT
JACKSON, Miss. — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on Friday published a draft of a new environmental impact statement that supports a proposal for massive pumps to drain floodwaters from parts of the rural Mississippi Delta — a reversal of a previous federal report that said the project would hurt wetlands.

The state’s two Republican U.S. senators praised the new findings for a project they and other politicians have supported. Conservation groups have said, though, that the proposal to build huge pumps at the confluence of the Yazoo and Mississippi rivers would be harmful and expensive.

Prominent Mississippi politicians have been pushing the Trump administration to revive and fund the project that has been estimated to cost more than $400 million. The Environmental Protection Agency vetoed the project in 2008 under Republican President George W. Bush, with the agency saying “adverse impacts on wetlands and their associated fisheries and wildlife resources are unacceptable.”

The draft published by the Corps of Engineers on Friday said new research shows that the project is “not anticipated to convert any wetlands into non-wetlands.”

“While this project is still far from the finish line, I am encouraged that the Corps has listened to the people of Mississippi and seen the impact of the floods on our state and our environment,” Sen. Roger Wicker said in a statement Friday.

The Corps of Engineers said it will conduct online public hearings and will accept public comments until Nov. 30.

EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler said in April 2019 that the agency would reconsider the decision that has blocked the project.

In April, the Corps of Engineers filed a public notice in the Federal Register saying it would prepare a new environmental impact statement for the Yazoo Backwater Area north of Vicksburg. The expanse of Delta flatland has experienced significant flooding during nine of the past 10 years, the Corps said.

The late Sen. John McCain once called the pumps “one of the worst projects ever conceived by Congress,” and opponents say pushing water out of the south Delta could cause worse flooding downstream along the Mississippi River.

Among the Mississippi politicians trying to revive the project are Wicker, Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith, current Gov. Tate Reeves and his fellow Republican predecessor Phil Bryant and Democratic U.S. Rep. Bennie Thompson, whose congressional district includes the areas that would be most affected.

The Sierra Club has called the pump project is a “boondoggle” and “the poster child for political pork barrel spending.” Louie Miller, director of the group’s Mississippi chapter, said the Corps previously found that most of the area that flooded in 2019 would have still been submerged even if the pumps were in place. He said agricultural interests would be the main beneficiaries.

Another conservation group, American Rivers, said in April that the Big Sunflower River in northwestern Mississippi is threatened by the pump project. The Big Sunflower drains into the Yazoo River, and the group said the pumps would harm 200,000 acres (80,937 hectares) of “nationally significant wetlands.”

EPA letting some hazardous coal ash ponds stay open longer
FILE - In this Aug. 7, 2019, photo, the Kingston Fossil Plant stands near a waterway in Kingston, Tenn. The Trump administration will let some leaking or otherwise dangerous coal ash storage ponds stay in operation for years more and some unlined ponds stay open indefinitely under a rule change announced Friday, Oct. 16, 2020. In 2008, the six-story-tall dike on a massive coal ash pond at the Tennessee plant collapsed, releasing more than a billion gallons of coal ash into the Swan Pond community. It remains the largest industrial spill in modern U.S. history and prompted the 2015 regulations that were intended to increase oversight of the industry.
FILE - In this Aug. 7, 2019, photo, the Kingston Fossil Plant stands near a waterway in Kingston, Tenn. The Trump administration will let some leaking or otherwise dangerous coal ash storage ponds stay in operation for years more and some unlined ponds stay open indefinitely under a rule change announced Friday, Oct. 16, 2020. In 2008, the six-story-tall dike on a massive coal ash pond at the Tennessee plant collapsed, releasing more than a billion gallons of coal ash into the Swan Pond community. It remains the largest industrial spill in modern U.S. history and prompted the 2015 regulations that were intended to increase oversight of the industry. (Mark Humphrey, File/Associated Press)
By Travis Loller | AP
Oct. 16, 2020 at 1:26 p.m. EDT

NASHVILLE, Tenn. — The Trump administration will let some leaking or otherwise dangerous coal ash storage ponds stay in operation for years more and some unlined ponds stay open indefinitely under a rule change announced Friday.

The move by the Environmental Protection Agency is the administration’s latest rollback of environmental and public health regulations governing operators of coal-fired power plants, which are taking hits financially as cheaper natural gas, solar and wind power make dirtier-burning coal plants less competitive.

Friday’s move weakens an Obama-era rule in which the EPA regulated the storage and disposal of toxic coal ash for the first time, including closing coal-ash dumping ponds that were unstable or contaminating groundwater.

The looser strictures announced Friday are “important to power-producing utilities that Americans in a number of states rely on every day,” EPA assistant administrator Peter Wright said in a statement.

Coal ash is a byproduct of burning coal for power and contains arsenic, mercury, lead and other hazardous heavy metals. U.S. coal plants produce about 100 million tons (90 million metric tonnes) annually of ash and other waste.

Data released by utilities in March 2018, after the Obama administration required groundwater monitoring around coal ash storage sites, showed widespread evidence of contamination at coal plants from Virginia to Alaska.

For decades, utilities largely disposed of coal ash by sluicing it into huge open pits. In 2008, the six-story-tall dike on a massive coal ash pond at a Tennessee plant collapsed, releasing more than a billion gallons of coal ash into the Swan Pond community. It remains the largest industrial spill in modern U.S. history and prompted the 2015 regulations that were intended to increase oversight of the industry.

But the change in administrations brought a change in priorities, with President Donald Trump vowing to boost the struggling coal industry by rolling back regulations and appointing former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler to lead the EPA.

The latest rollbacks will allow some coal plants to keep their storage ponds open for years longer than envisioned in the 2015 rule.

“The reason the utilities are arguing to keep the ponds is because they have put in these unlined pits out the back door of the power plant that act as a catchall for their toxic waste,” said Lisa Evans, an attorney for the environmental group Earthjustice. “They don’t want to get rid of them because they are cheap.”

The 2015 rule required the most dangerous ponds to close by April 2019, but that deadline has been repeatedly pushed back, Evans said. Her group sued over the original rule, arguing that it didn’t go far enough. One of their victories came in 2018 when the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that all unlined ponds (called “clay-lined” by the EPA) needed to close. The court stated simply, “Clay-lined units are dangerous.”

The revised rule tries to get around the court order by letting utilities demonstrate that their unlined ponds “pose no reasonable probability of adverse effects on human health or the environment.” The agency reasoned that all sites are different, and some unlined ponds might be safe.

But Evans said the process for determining safety could keep ponds that were scheduled to close open for many years longer.

“The Trump EPA is flouting the court’s decision,” she said. “I’ve never seen anything like this before.”

All the changes together are expected to save the industry between $41 million and $138 million per year, according to EPA estimates.