The EPA isn’t allowing an increase in emissions

Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Andrew Wheeler at the White House on July 8, 2019.

April 17, 2020 at 4:15 p.m. EDT
The April 11 editorial “The EPA tees off on the environment,” about the Environmental Protection Agency’s temporary policy of enforcement during the novel coronavirus public health emergency, misrepresented the policy in ways that make the conclusions unfair to readers and the agency.

The memo does not allow any increase in emissions. The policy only forgives penalties for failure to carry out routine record keeping and monitoring and only if, on a “case-by-case” basis, the EPA agrees that the public health emergency was the cause. This means a facility can take steps to protect workers, even if some routine sampling or reports won’t be completed. For all other coronavirus-caused noncompliance, the policy only says the EPA will consider the circumstances when determining an appropriate response.

The EPA has granted waivers of environmental compliance for natural disasters such as hurricanes in many administrations, including the Obama administration. Past disasters affected only a few states. The coronavirus has affected the entire country, and President Trump declared a major disaster in all 50 states.


The editorial’s comments on the auto emissions rule in the commentary were also unsupported by evidence. The final rule requires year-over-year reductions in carbon dioxide emissions through model year 2026. Most auto companies are not meeting regulations. They comply by cashing in credits and paying penalties, costs passed on to consumers. Our regulation is achievable and will result in lowering CO2 emissions.

The EPA is working very hard to institute smart, science-based actions in the interests of all Americans as we fight and win against the virus.

The Energy 202: Climate activists worry #EarthDayAtHome won't be as effective as in-person protests

By 
Dino Grandoni

April 22, 2020 at 8:30 a.m. EDT

with Paulina Firozi

It's the 50th anniversary of Earth Day. But the celebration will take place without the expected hundreds of thousands of marchers in Washington and other cities calling for action on climate change. 

Those plans for mass protests were upended with the emergence of the novel coronavirus. Any would-be demonstrators are hunkered down in their households, set to join live-streamed events, post on social media and otherwise try to make the most of #EarthDayAtHome.

But climate advocates worried about two crises right now — both the pandemic and global warming — say it's hard not to be disappointed about a missed opportunity for action and primetime coverage. 

“With 6 billion people locked down, it's a little tough,” said Kathleen Rogers, president of the Earth Day Network. “Everybody's disappointed and upset.”

The focus in Washington – and the world – is instead on coronavirus today. 
Organizers wanted Earth Day's golden jubilee to spark the same swift action seen after the first one in 1970, when Congress passed sweeping laws to curb the highly visible air and water pollution dirtying the nation's skylines and seaways, and Richard Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency to help enforce them.



But the pandemic has effectively dashed those hopes. Gina McCarthy, who ran the EPA from 2013 to 2017, said it was difficult enough getting people to care about the invisible threat of greenhouse gases building up in the atmosphere even in the absence of the deadly viral outbreak.

“It's hard to do in this day and age, looking at the pandemic that we're facing now,” said McCarthy, who now heads the Natural Resources Defense Council. “And I don't blame people for wanting to focus on today.”

But climate change, she added, “is no less a threat to our health and in our future.”

Organizers are taking to the Internet in lieu of in-person events. 
The live streams will be just as star-studded as ever. Former vice president Al Gore and former secretary of state John F. Kerry will make speeches. Actors Mark Ruffalo and Joaquin Phoenix will chat on panels. And Questlove and Bono will give musical performances.



With many state lockdowns coming mid-March, the event changes had to come together in less than a month. “It's been difficult to put together, but we have a really great-thinking team,” said Dillon Bernard of the Future Coalition, which is part of a group of nine youth-led climate organizations planning 42 hours of live-streamed content over three days.

But it is hard to imagine those videos online capturing the media attention as much as was planned. Before the pandemic hit, organizers were planning during Earth Day week to picket the branches of banks that underwrite fossil-fuel development, protest on the campuses of colleges invested in oil and gas, and rally at a concert on the Mall.

And nearby, at the headquarters of the EPA — also turning 50 this year — over 500 employees had volunteered to clean up along the Anacostia River. That and 12 other agency events around the country had to be scrapped, according to Andrew Wheeler, the current agency head.



“We're encouraging all of our employees, as well as all Americans, to do something around their home to celebrate Earth Day, [including] picking up litter right around their home," Wheeler tells my colleague Jacqueline Alemany.

Even with so many stuck at home and with nothing else to do, it will hard to rev up people online.
Without the camaraderie of picketing shoulder to shoulder, said Dana Fisher, a University of Maryland sociologist who studies climate activism, it will be hard to re-create the fun “eco-festival” atmosphere that helped draw in people to past Event Day events. 

“It's a bit of a lift to get people to live stream,” she said.

That undermines one of the points of Earth Day when it was founded in response to a 1969 oil spill near Santa Barbara, Calif.: to get the politically disengaged to care about the environment. 



And some activists worry about the many options people have. In addition to the Future Coalition's three-day live stream, the Smithsonian and Earth Day Network are hosting their own digital events. “That's problematic,” Fisher said. “It's going to split the constituents in the movement.”

But Rogers, head of the Earth Day Network, said the separate live streams made sense since each group is trying to reach a different audience. Still, she said, the groups talked “all day long, every stinking day” to coordinate speakers and help bolster each other's online events.

“Many of us are sharing content,” Rogers said. 

Earth Day is still important because the coronavirus can't be separated from environmental issues.
While the research is early, scientists are already finding links between two pollutants — soot and nitrogen dioxide — and lethal outcomes from the respiratory disease caused by the coronavirus. Those two pollutants are among the handful the first Earth Day protesters were demanding the federal government do something about.



And protecting nature, scientists say, is the first line of defense against stopping another pathogen from jumping from animals to humans — as happened with the novel coronavirus, which likely came from a bat. Other well-known and worrisome infections, including SARS, MERS, Ebola and HIV, have their origins in animals too.

With deforestation, urbanization and the global wildlife trade bringing people closer than ever to animals, so-called zoonotic infections have more opportunity than ever to pass between species. 

"This pandemic is the consequence of our persistent and excessive intrusion in nature and the vast illegal wildlife trade," said Thomas Lovejoy, a conservation biologist and senior fellow at the U.N. Foundation.

More broadly, said McCarthy, meeting the challenges of both climate change and covid-19 requires heeding the advice of experts — something she said the Trump administration frequently fails to do.



“It's just really important that we be prepared,” she said. “So you listen to the science, you prepare for these challenges based on science, so that you can be ready to act in a way that protects people.”

Read more about the 50th anniversary of Earth Day from my colleague Sarah Kaplan here:

50 years later, Earth Day’s unsolved problem: How to build a more sustainable world (Sarah Kaplan)

Oil continues its tumble
Trump pledges to help U.S. energy companies. 
The president said he ordered his administration plan to provide federal assistance to the nation’s oil and gas industry, which has been pummeled during the pandemic.

“Until now, the American oil industry has been divided on whether to seek federal help, with the larger companies and the American Petroleum Institute arguing against it,” Will Englund reports. “But Energy Secretary Dan Brouillette said Tuesday on Bloomberg TV that the United States would be taking ‘very aggressive’ steps to assist the oil industry and might use funds from the Fed’s Main Street lending program.” 


Bharat Ramamurti, named by Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) to the stimulus oversight panel, warned that if the plan includes some of the money allocated by lawmakers, the “Congressional Oversight Commission has oversight authority and should scrutinize the plan very carefully.” 


The industry is readying for continued devastation. 
In the meantime, thew global oil glut "sent prices so low Monday that sellers holding U.S. crude contracts paid buyers as much as $30 per barrel to take it off their hands,” Thomas Heath reports. 

Oil prices tumble to 21-year low
U.S. oil prices plunged to levels not seen since 1999 as demand for crude decreased on April 20 amid the coronavirus pandemic. (Reuters)
“The collapse went international Tuesday, with futures prices for the global benchmark, Brent crude, dropping to a fraction of the $50 or so needed for a producer to make money. It was an ominous sign, suggesting that oil markets and the world economy may not stabilize for months.” 



The oil industry has never seen the price drops it experienced this week. 

The tumult has resulted in layoffs and shuttered wells. “In Midland, Texas, the epicenter of the oil shale boom over the last decade, parking lots at companies like Chevron, Diamondback and Apache are empty aside from a scattering of pumping trucks,” the New York Times reports. “Executives are working from home, huddling with their colleagues and board members to decide how quickly to shut down production and lay off workers."

Texas oil regulators delayed a vote on oil production cuts. 
One closely watched government agency, the Texas Railroad Commission, which regulates the state’s oil and gas sector, opted not to move on a proposal to set mandated oil production cuts. Instead, a vote was postponed until at least May 5, and the regulators established a task force to gather more information, the Texas Tribune reports.

More coronavirus fallout
A coal company with Trump administration ties gets $10 million small-business loan. 
Hallador Energy, based in Indiana, got the low-interest loan from the Paycheck Protection Program, which was designed for companies with fewer than 500 workers, despite having a head count of more than 700, Juliet Eilperin and I report. Under Small Business Administration guidelines, some bituminous-coal-mining firms with up to 1,500 employees can qualify as small businesses.

The firm also sports two connections to the Trump administration: “Scott Pruitt, the former Environmental Protection Agency administrator, was hired last year to lobby for the publicly traded firm in Indiana; and the company’s former government relations director now works at the Energy Department.”

The White House is planning to cut regulations as part of its effort to reopen the economy. 
The plan is not finalized, but could include environmental policies, as well as labor policy, workplace safety and health care, Jeff Stein and Robert Costa report.



“Still, the Trump initiative will probably be fiercely criticized by congressional Democrats and other economic experts, who say the administration’s attempts to repeal business regulations reflect long-standing conservative priorities rather than a measure that will help Americans survive the current public health and economic emergency,” they write. “Trump has for years celebrated a massive deregulatory push under his administration as an economic boost, but opponents say the efforts have created more environmental and labor hazards for workers and consumers.” 

A green group threatens to sue over Trump administration's waiving of pollution compliance. 
The Center for Biological Diversity filed a notice of its intent to sue the administration over the EPA’s move last month to temporarily waive some compliance requirements during the pandemic. 

The group cited concerns about endangered species. “While people should certainly not be put at undue risk, the Trump administration must not be allowed to use this pandemic to give polluters free rein to foul our air and water and hurt wildlife,” Jared Margolis, an attorney with the center, said in a statement. 

The center called on the agency to provide information within 14 days on how it plans to comply with parts of the Endangered Species Act if the agency wants to avoid litigation.

Boeing employees returned to work with a new normal. 
In facilities that reopened this week after a three-week furlough, workers found hand-washing stations and managers checking in about their health in what is a sort of experiment for whether Americans can safely go back to work. But it was a return that left many workers and families uneasy, Christian Davenport and Gregory Scruggs report.

“In the Puget Sound region of Washington state, 27,000 Boeing employees returned to work. A few thousand more returned to defense plants outside Philadelphia and Columbus, Ohio. A plant outside of Charleston, S.C. remains closed for the time being,” they write. 

Power plays
Joe Biden scores United Auto Workers endorsement.
The 400-member from auto workers union announced its support for the former vice president. 

Trump “has heavily courted autoworkers in battleground states like Michigan and Ohio, while Biden has touted his support for autoworkers when he served as vice president and his support of policies championed by unions,” Reuters reports. “The endorsement comes at an opportune time for Biden, who has struggled to maintain a high profile during the COVID-19 pandemic and sustain the momentum he had built up in his lightning-quick run toward becoming the Democratic nominee.” 

D.C. Circuit court rejected the EPA’s policy on science advisers. 
A panel of judges for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit unanimously ruled that a 2017 policy from former EPA chief Pruitt that blocked grant recipients from joining its federal advisory committees is unlawful, E&E reports. 

What the ruling says: “Even the Directive itself agrees that 'it is in the public interest to select the most qualified, knowledgeable, and experienced candidates,'" Judge David Tatel wrote. “Yet the Directive nowhere confronts the possibility that excluding grant recipients — that is, individuals who EPA has independently deemed qualified enough to receive competitive funding — from advisory committees might exclude those very candidates.”
The reaction: “This is another terrific victory for science,” Tom Zimpleman, an attorney at the Natural Resources Defense Council, said in a statement. “It’s a rejection of EPA’s efforts to kick out accomplished, independent scientists and skew advice it receives on critical public health and environmental issues."
Global warming watch
This could be the planet’s warmest year on record. 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration projects there is a 75 percent chance 2020 will be the warmest recorded year on Earth. 

Image without a caption
“The NOAA projection, made late last week, is based on statistical modeling now that the first quarter of 2020 is off to a near-record warm start, coming in as the second-warmest January through March period since instrument records began in 1880,” Andrew Freedman reports. 

Freedman adds: “The land and oceans respond to the amount of greenhouse gases in the air, rather than emissions rates, which means the sudden cut in carbon emissions related to the coronavirus pandemic will not affect global average surface temperatures in the near future.” 

Power Up: On 50th anniversary of Earth Day, EPA head says climate change 'not the only environmental issue that we face as a planet'

By 
Jacqueline Alemany

April 22, 2020 at 7:12 a.m. EDT

with Brent D. Griffiths

Greetings, earthlings, Happy Earth day. How are you celebrating the 50th anniversary of Earth Day at home? Composting and plant parenthood have become essential parts of my self-isolation routine (hello, day 43!). Adding Stanley Tucci's Negronis into the mix, too. Thanks for waking up with us.

In the Agencies
EARTH DAY AT A SOCIAL DISTANCE: On this 50th anniversary of Earth Day, Americans are hunkered down at home during a public health crisis that may be exacerbated by poor air quality. It's not quite what young climate activists who have galvanized the global climate movement had in mind. 

A growing body of scientific evidence has linked higher levels of air pollution to increased death rates from covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus. But last week, against the recommendations of Environmental Protection Agency staff scientists, EPA head Andrew Wheeler announced his agency wouldn't tighten national air quality standards for fine particle air pollution, more commonly known as soot. 



In an interview Tuesday, Wheeler told Power Up he is unlikely to reverse the EPA's decision to maintain existing air quality standards for fine particle pollution, despite its emerging links to higher death rates from coronavirus. 

He claimed studies, such as the one by Harvard University's T.H. Chan School of Public Health showing a link between PM 2.5 “ dangerous air particles so small they can enter the bloodstream “  were lagging the facts on the ground.

Quite frankly, it's already too late for our proposal. We had to go up with a proposal last week. And we will take comment, and [advocates] can submit that as comments, Wheeler said of the EPA proposed rules setting national soot levels for the next five years. I think it's premature to put too much weight on a study that hasn't been finalized or peer reviewed yet."
We cannot go back and clean the air of the past, Dr. Francesca Dominici, a Harvard biostatistician who led the Harvard study, told Power Up last week. But in the future, we can target and make sure that in the counties that have high level pollution, we take environmental measures so that the disease doesn't kill as many people.
Wheeler's original aims for the EPA's Earth Day celebration met the fate of most of our 2020 Spring plans: thwarted by the coronavirus pandemic. The agency had originally sought to clean up beach and water sites around the country. Now, Wheeler is encouraging his employees to celebrate at home by picking up litter or working on recycling approved materials.



The aforementioned activities conjure a retrograde vision compared to what it means to be an environmentalist in 2020 for some young voters who prioritize climate change as their top issue. Wheeler told us the agency takes climate change seriously but praised EPA for returning to its core mission during the Trump presidency of lowering pollution and taking a pragmatic approach to climate change.

What we're doing is still fulfilling the mission of the agency, Wheeler told us. We're taking climate change seriously. But it's not the only environmental issue that we face as a planet."
Many scientists and activists argue that climate change is the single most urgent environmental challenge  faced by the U.S. ” and the world. And EPA's take on the day first celebrated in 1970 is perhaps emblematic of the disconnect between Trump's EPA and the broader climate movement. 

This was not an anti-litter campaign, Denis Hayes, an organizer of the first Earth Day in 1970, told the New York Times's John Schwartz. This was talking about fundamental changes in the nature of the American economy.
¦one of the problems that motivated the early Earth Day activists remains unsolved, said Hayes, now 75. We haven't quit the fossil fuels scientists say are warming the atmosphere and harming the Earth. Humans use more resources than the planet produces. Society has not changed course, our colleague Sarah Kaplan reports. 
The contrast between the way young voters and the Trump administration view the issue might prove to be problematic come November for a president who has publicly feuded with and mocked climate activist Greta Thunberg. 



As You know, we're getting real world results with this pragmatic approach to addressing climate change but we're also addressing all the other environmental issues that Americans face day in and day out, Wheeler told Power Up. A lot of young people think our air is getting dirtier, and it's not, Wheeler added, stating that all six of our air quality criteria had decreased.
Fact check: the level of pollutants in at least one of those six categories ” particulate matter ” has worsened: Air pollution worsened in the United States in 2017 and 2018, new data shows, a reversal after years of sustained improvement with significant implications for public health, our colleague Christopher Ingraham reported last year. 

Working from home: In our interview, Wheeler asserted the EPA is aggressively acting to provide clean air and water to Americans ” particularly to communities of color disproportionately impacted by climate change.

But the pandemic hasn't stopped the EPA from recently rolling back standards easing industrial regulations and weakening emission limits for the nation's cars and trucks. 

EPA's own analyses of these rollbacks project more air pollution than what would have been allowed under the Obama-era rule. But Wheeler argued the recently finalized Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient Vehicles rule is not projected to increase air pollution. 

It's not as aggressive as the Obama administration's proposal was, but we still require 1.5 percent decrease in [carbon dioxide] emissions year over year, said Wheeler. So we are still decreasing air emissions under our CAFE standards, so each year from now will be lower than the previous year. And it's based on real world analysis. So it is not that we're not allowing more pollution ” we're not quite as aggressive as the Obama administration.
According to our colleagues Juliet Eilperin and Brady Dennis, the government's own estimates say more Americans will die as a result of increased air pollution during that same period than if the existing standards remained in place.



An analysis of the revised mileage standards by the Environmental Defense Fund projects the changes will cause an additional 1.5 billion metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions into the air over five years, per Juliet and Brady.
Wheeler also said the administration's unraveling of the Obama-era clean power plan with its own Affordable Clean Energy (ACE) Rule, which relaxes emissions limits for power plants, is one of the ways the agency is addressing climate change. 

According to environmentalists who are currently suing the Trump administration, EPA's own analysis projects the rule could result in increased carbon emissions in some regions of the country. And whatever gains the power sector may make on climate were likely to come with or without regulation as coal struggles to compete with cheaper forms of power, like natural gas and renewable sources.
In response to the coronavirus crisis crippling the American economy, the EPA also announced a relaxation of some environmental rules: EPA notified petrochemical plants, power companies and other major industries they could determine on their own if they can report their operations' air and water pollution levels during the virus outbreak. 

Wheeler told us the enforcement memo was not permanent but he was asked by the White House to assess the efficacy of any regulatory changes that we've learned from the coronavirus. Our colleagues Jeff Stein and Bob Costa reported the White House is expected to repeal or suspend federal regulations affecting industry that could impact environmental policy.  



One of the things that we are looking at, for example, is more electronic reporting of some of some of the things that have to go to the agency. So it's not, 'we're not looking at regulatory initiatives that will roll back environmental controls.' We're looking at how to make things more efficient, Wheeler told us.
Cleanup on aisle five: Wheeler also shouted out to the EPA's career scientists who are working overtime during the pandemic to expand disinfectant products approved for use against the coronavirus. The list now includes over 350 surface disinfectant products that are effective against the coronavirus. 

EPA relaxed requirements related to the Pesticide Registration Notice to allow registrants of currently registered pesticide disinfectant products containing any of the active ingredients specified in this notice to use any source of the specified active ingredients without having to first apply for and receive EPA approval of an amendment to their pesticide registration to identify the new source of ingredient.
On March 6, we had 60 products that we said were effective against the coronavirus, Wheeler told us. Now we're up to I believe it's over [350] products have now been cleared for use for the coronavirus.
Typically, before this. It took us two or three months to approve a product. We're now down to just a couple of weeks, he explained. And our scientists are working overtime to take a look at the products and see what is effective ¦. Because we don't want to see people buying a product that is not effective in using it and think that they're safeguarding their families. 
At The White House
TRUMP TO SUSPEND IMMIGRATION FOR 60 DAYS: The president provided a rationale for the unprecedented decision that was primarily economic, arguing that he wants Americans to have access to work as millions of people have lost their jobs amid the coronavirus crisis, Nick Miroff, Maria Sacchetti and Tracy Jan report.

The executive order is still being written: Senior officials at the Department of Homeland Security and other federal agencies could not respond to basic questions about the scope of the order, our colleagues write. Other aides said privately that the president had once more announced a sweeping policy that was not yet ready for implementation, and his administration was trying to piece together an executive order for him to sign that would catch up to his whim.
What we know: The freeze will block green card recipients but continue to allow temporary workers on nonimmigrant visas to enter the country. The president said seasonal farm laborers would not be affected and the suspension will help to conserve vital medical resources.



The virus rationale doesn't add up: The outbreak is well-established across the country and has been for more than a month, our colleagues write. The United States has more confirmed coronavirus cases, by far, than any other country, with nearly 800,000 as of Tuesday afternoon.
Visa services had already been suspended overseas: That means the very few would-be immigrants are likely to be stopped just before they board planes, our colleagues write.
The U.S. is deporting infected migrants to struggling countries: Since the coronavirus struck the United States, immigration authorities have deported dozens of infected migrants, leaving governments and nonprofits across Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean struggling to respond, Kevin Sieff and Nick Miroff report.

After countries resisted, U.S. officials said they would screen migrants slated for removal: But they did not commit to administering coronavirus tests. In many instances, the screenings, which consist primarily of taking a person's temperature, have failed to detect cases. Even though overall deportations declined this month, the United States has returned thousands of people across the Western Hemisphere in April, our colleagues write.
You are reading the Power Up newsletter.
Not a regular subscriber?


On The Hill
SENATE PASSES PPP DEAL: The Senate passed a $484 billion deal to replenish a small-business loan program that's been overrun by demand and to devote more money to hospitals and coronavirus testing. [Trump] said he would sign it into law, Erica Werner and Seung Min Kim report.

The details: The bill would increase funding for the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) by $310 billion. It would also boost a separate small-business emergency grant and loan program by $60 billion, and direct $75 billion to hospitals and $25 billion to a new coronavirus testing program.
Democrats didn't get everything they wanted: Democrats fought successfully for money in the bill for hospitals and testing, but they did not get Republicans and Trump administration officials to go along with their demand for $150 billion for cities and states, our colleagues write. [Senate Minority Leader Charles E.] Schumer said he hopes to see that addressed in the next package, and Trump has indicated he is open to it.
On to phase 4?: Democratic lawmakers say it should be just the beginning, our colleague write. Schumer (D-N.Y.) wants a bill  rivaling the record $2.2 trillion stimulus measure passed last month. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) disagrees at this point. Trump continues to push his goal of a large infrastructure investment and a payroll tax cut along with tax incentives for restaurants and other industries. 



It's time to push the pause button, McConnell told our colleagues of any additional spending legislation.
Key quote: Waving $2.7 trillion through the Senate and the House on voice votes is not the way the Congress was set up to function, McConnell said. And since I believe we're in the process of beginning to get back to normal, with proper safeguards when we go out, we ought to deal with this the way Congress normally would, with full attendance in the Capitol, doing our work.
The Policies
CDC DIRECTOR WARNS OF SECOND WAVE: There's a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through, CDC Director Robert Redfield said in an interview with The Washington Post. And when I've said this to others, they kind of put their head back, they don't understand what I mean.

Why things could be worse: We're going to have the flu epidemic and the coronavirus epidemic at the same time, Redfield said. "Having two simultaneous respiratory outbreaks would put unimaginable strain on the health-care system, he said. The first wave of covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, has already killed more than 42,000 people across the country. It has overwhelmed hospitals and revealed gaping shortages in test kits, ventilators and protective equipment for health-care workers, Lena H. Sun reports.
Add Redfield to the list of officials pushing back on protesters: It's not helpful, he said of protests to state stay--at-home orders and calls for governors to liberate their citizens.

Trump 'looking at' new hydroxychloroquine studies
President Trump on April 21 said that he would be looking into new studies warning against using hydroxychloroquine to combat the novel coronavirus. (The Washington Post)
MORE REASONS TO BE WARY OF HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE: An anti-malarial drug [Trump] has aggressively promoted to treat covid-19 had no benefit and was linked to higher rates of death for Veterans Affairs patients hospitalized with the novel coronavirus, according to a study, raising further questions about the safety and efficacy of a treatment that has seen widespread use in the pandemic, Christopher Rowland reports.



More details: The study by VA and academic researchers analyzed outcomes of 368 male patients nationwide, with 97 receiving hydroxychloroquine, 113 receiving hydroxychloroquine in combination with the antibiotic azithromycin, and 158 not receiving any hydroxychloroquine, our colleague writes. Rates of death in the groups treated with the drugs were worse than those who did not receive the drugs, the study found. Rates of patients on ventilators were roughly equal, with no benefit demonstrated by the drugs.
The authors touted the importance of more clinical studies: These findings highlight the importance of awaiting the results of ongoing prospective, randomized, controlled studies before widespread adoption of these drugs, wrote the authors.
An NIH panel is also recommending against the drug in some cases: A panel of experts convened by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases recommends against doctors using a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin for the treatment of covid-19 patients because of potential toxicities, NPR's Joe Palca reports. 

The combination increases the risk of sudden cardiac death, the panel found: The recommendation against their combined use would seem to fly in the face of comments made by President Trump suggesting the combination might be helpful. On March 21, for example, the president described them in a tweet as having a ˜real chance to be one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine,' NPR reports.
The Campaign
BATTLE OVER DIGITAL BREWING IN BIDEN CAMPAIGN: Joe Biden's campaign leadership is clashing over the future of its digital operation ” a rift that comes as campaigning has moved largely online and as Biden faces a yawning deficit against [Trump's] massive digital operation, Politico's Alex Thompson reports.

The disagreement involves a group backed by Mike Bloomberg: The fight is over whether to beef up its own digital team or hire Hawkfish which is backed financially by billionaire Mike Bloomberg and ran the digital operation for his presidential campaign, Politico reports.

For now, Biden's digital operation pales in comparison to other campaigns: The former vice president's operation has roughly 25 people. Trump's campaign has a 100 person-plus team. Hillary Clinton's digital operation was just less than 100 at this point in 2016, according to three Clinton digital staffers, Politico reports.
The Biden camp's response: In a statement, a Biden adviser said the current digital team packs 'a hell of a punch and we're looking forward to expanding for the general election while being smart about not overextending ourselves,' Politico reports. The adviser said that new hires are coming but did not specify when.
Michigan Gov. on whether she's been asked for vetting documents from Biden: 'No, not yet"
When asked whether former Vice President Joe Biden has asked her for vetting or personal information, Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said, "I'm not putting any energy into politics¦" When pressed further about whether she's been asked to provide any documents, she responded, "No, not yet." (Washington Post Live)
VEEP WATCH: Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. The day after our colleague Bob Costa questioned Whitmer about whether the Biden campaign had asked her for any potential vetting information (No, not yet) the governor was a subject of just the type of story that arises during such searches for a campaign's No. 2.

Her administration abruptly canceled a no-bid contract to help track the virus: "[This came] a day after announcing the hiring of a state Democratic consultant and a national firm that has worked for prominent Democratic causes, Matt Viser and Josh Dawsey report. The reversal comes amid complaints that the governor tapped politically connected firms to collect health data on state residents and monitor sensitive medical information.

The contract was worth nearly $200,000 over the next eight weeks: The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services announced that the program would be run by Great Lakes Community Engagement, which is headed by a Michigan-based Democratic consultant, our colleagues write. And it would be managed in coordination with EveryAction, a firm that is closely linked to NGP VAN, a technology provider that boasts that it powers ˜nearly every major Democratic campaign in America.'"
Congress can't really work from home. Is that a problem?
Congress is still passing legislation during the coronavirus pandemic, but normal business is still very much on hold. How does this affect their work? (Zach Purser Brown, Rhonda Colvin/The Washington Post)
In the Media
WHAT ELSE YOU NEED TO KNOW:

The first covid-19 death in the U.S. occurred weeks earlier than previously known: Two coronavirus-infected people died in Santa Clara County on Feb. 6 and Feb. 17, the medical examiner revealed Tuesday, making them first documented covid-19 fatalities in the United States, the Los Angeles Times's Matt Hamilton, Paige St. John and Rong-Gong Lin II report. Until now, the first fatality was believed to have occurred in Kirkland, Wash., on Feb. 29.

Democratic lawmaker named to coronavirus oversight panel failed to disclose tax returns: Miami Democratic Rep. Donna Shalala, the lone House Democrat on the committee set up to oversee $500 billion in taxpayer money being used for coronavirus-related payouts to large businesses, violated federal law when she failed to disclose stock sales while serving in Congress, the Miami Herald's Alex Daugherty reports.

Shalala's office said she and her financial adviser made a mistake: Shalala told the Miami Herald on Monday she sold a variety of stocks throughout 2019 to eliminate any potential conflicts of interest after she was elected to Congress in November 2018, the Herald reports. But the transactions were not publicly reported as required by the STOCK Act, a 2012 law that prohibits members of Congress and their employees from using private information gleaned from their official positions for personal benefit and requires them to report stock sales and purchases within 45 days.
Several states have tried to ban abortions amid the pandemic: These efforts come through emergency orders against elective medical procedures and nonessential businesses. Abortion rights supporters said the changes put unfair burdens on women, Dan Keating, Lauren Tierney and Tim Meko report.

Department stores are facing dire futures: At a time when retailers should be putting in orders for the all-important holiday shopping season, stores are furloughing tens of thousands of corporate and store employees, hoarding cash and desperately planning how to survive this crisis. The specter of mass default is being discussed not just behind closed doors but in analysts' future models, the New York Times's Sapna Maheshwari and Vanessa Friedman report of an industry that has been dealt repeated blows over the last decade but has been walloped by crash in sales amid the coronavirus.

Moving up: Dan Scavino, the White House director of social media who sometimes operates [Trump's] Twitter feed, has been promoted to deputy chief of staff for communications, officials said, the New York Time's Maggie Haberman reports. Scavino's new title is just the latest shakeup in the White House's comms. shop since Mark Meadows became chief of staff.