Chicago awarded $1M USDA urban farming grant
By GREG TROTTER
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
SEP 08, 2016 AT 12:52 PM

Chicago will receive a $1 million federal grant to boost and coordinate urban farming in the city, particularly on land near the long-awaited Englewood Line rail trail, city and federal officials announced Thursday.

Chicago's new "Growing for Chicago" initiative is one of 45 projects to be awarded a total of $26.6 million this year through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's annual Conservation Innovation Grants. The city project aims to prepare land and recruit farmers for urban farming near the planned Englewood rail trail, among other objectives. Two other Illinois entities will also receive funding — Evanston-based Iroquois Valley Farms and Fresh Coast Capital, a Chicago-based company that's launching a new program in Peoria.


Urban farming has gained momentum in Chicago in recent years with the increased popularity of locally sourced food. Chicago's project will provide "microgrants" and technical assistance to farmers, while also recruiting and training new farmers from neighborhoods, such as Englewood, where there's a dearth of jobs and few healthy food options, said Chris Wheat, chief sustainability officer of Chicago.

The project aims to develop a "critical mass of people" to expand urban farming in Chicago, partnering with existing nonprofits and businesses to achieve its goals, Wheat said.

"We know urban farming has the potential to be a significant driver of economic development and produce much-needed jobs in these communities, but it will take time to figure out what that looks like," Wheat said.


Repurposing the abandoned railway through Englewood into a recreational nature trail has been discussed for years. The well-received unveiling of The 606 trail on the Northwest Side last year reignited calls for the city to move forward with the Englewood project. More announcements likely will come on that project next year, Wheat said.



The city will provide its share of the matching grant through "in-kind staff time" and through the continued environmental remediation of land near the Englewood Line that's owned or in the process of being acquired by the city, Wheat said. The city also will hire a full-time urban agriculture coordinator to shepherd the project.

Once the land near the Englewood Line is prepared for farming, Wheat said, it could be placed into trust through an entity like NeighborSpace, a Chicago-based nonprofit urban land trust.

While most of the conservation grants are awarded to projects in rural areas, urban farming projects such as Chicago's have potential to address both social and environmental challenges, said Jason Weller, chief of the Natural Resources Conservation Service, the USDA agency that administers the grants.

"Obviously, they have big goals, but they're going about in a very systematic way," Weller said of the Chicago project. "I'm very excited about what they've put together."



The other two Illinois projects to receive grants through the USDA include:

•A $944,715 grant for Evanston-based Iroquois Valley Farms, a farmland financing company, that will help offset the onerous cost of transitioning farmland from conventional to organic. The project "expands our ability to tap into private markets to finance this expansion and restoration of our organic soil," said CEO Dave Miller.

•A $940,800 grant for Fresh Coast Capital, a Chicago-based company that plans to "pilot an innovative approach to financing green infrastructure through impact investing in agroforestry and vegetable farming" in Peoria, according to the USDA release.

The matching federal grant program is expected to yield $59.1 million in total investment, according to the USDA.