Lake County health officials report 'no known cancer clusters' around local ethylene oxide plants, but detail oversight plans
By FRANK ABDERHOLDEN
NEWS-SUN |
DEC 01, 2018 AT 10:55 AM

In light of reports that two businesses emit ethylene oxide during their manufacturing process in Lake County, Lake County health officials are directing the public to a new U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website that monitors the emissions and reported that more testing and additional scrubbing equipment have been purchased for the operations.

The actions were outlined by Mark A. Pfister, executive director of the Lake County Health Department and Community Health Center, in a report Thursday to the 12-member board of health that governs the agency.


Pfister said the health department is working towards three goals to address the issue of the cancer-causing chemical — also referred to as EtO — whose existence at the two local plants was recently revealed in government reports and covered in several recent Chicago Tribune reports.

In an interview this week, Pfister said the department is “working with the U.S. EPA to put as much information as possible” on the new website: www.epa.gov/il/addressing-ethylene-oxide-emissions-lake-county-illinois.


“Our second goal is to get new controls installed as soon as possible,” he said, referring to Medline Industries in Waukegan and Vantage Specialty Chemicals in Gurnee, which have both agreed to install more emission-control equipment at their plants to reduce EtO output.


Both plants will need permits from the EPA and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for the additional equipment, and Pfister said officials are pushing for an expedited process, but not before testing begins along the fence line at the two facilities.

The Medline facility is located at 1160 S. Northpoint Boulevard on Waukegan’s west side, and the Vantage plant is at 3938 Porett Drive on the northeast side of Gurnee.

Pfister said the county is demanding the regulating agencies begin conducting emissions tests around the facilities before the new control equipment is installed, which could happen in early 2019.

“We want them testing before the controls are installed so we can see if there is a reduction in EtO emissions,” he said, adding that county officials have toured the Medline facility and will tour the Vantage one soon.

The county health department has no regulatory authority on air quality issues. According to Pfister, the U.S. EPA sets the regulations, and the IEPA is the permitting agency in Illinois.


“We want to make sure that those who do have the authority will protect our residents,” he said.

According to the new website, the EPA’s latest National Air Toxics Assessment (NATA) identified four census tracts in Lake County as having potential cancer risks of 100 in 1 million or greater from exposure to a group of air pollutants known as “air toxics.”

The majority of that risk was estimated to be from the pollutant ethylene oxide. Because the assessment does not identify risks from specific facilities, the EPA began investigating further.

The NATA risk estimates were modeled using emissions information from the 2014 National Emissions Inventory, which included ethylene oxide emissions from the Medline facility in Waukegan. After the assessment was released, the EPA learned that ethylene oxide emissions from Vantage Specialty Chemicals had been erroneously reported as zero to the National Emissions Inventory.

The federal EPA has been working with the state EPA to examine emissions information from both the Vantage and Medline facilities to determine potential next steps.


Pfister said that according to the data the county has, “there are no known cancer clusters in this area near these plants,” and he added that officials will continue to investigate.

There is no indication either Lake County facility is violating permits that allow ethylene oxide emissions within certain limits, according to previous reporting by the Tribune, but legal air pollution still can be dangerous, and the U.S. EPA has not updated its regulations to reflect research that shows the chemical poses health risks at significantly lower levels than previously thought.

Medline uses ethylene oxide to sterilize medical equipment. Vantage uses the chemical in the production of other products, Pfister said.

In 2016, the carcinogenicity rating for the chemical was changed from “probably carcinogenic to humans” to “carcinogenic to humans” when studies found it damages DNA, which may account for its cancer-causing activity, according to the report to the Lake County Board of Health.

Direct contact might cause breathing issues, neurologic symptoms, an allergic rash, or skin burn, and there might be an increased risk of developing blood cancers in men — such as leukemia and lymphoma — and breast cancer in women if they had industrial exposures to high levels of the chemical for long periods of time, according to the report.


Pfister told the board members the next steps include obtaining and reviewing permitting records from IEPA for the two Lake County companies and tours of both facilities to better understand how the chemical is emitted from the plant during the manufacturing process.

Since the Chicago Tribune first reported on a cancer cluster near a Sterigenics plant in Willowbrook that sterilizes medical equipment, local political representatives have weighed in.

Illinois Senators Dick Durbin and Tammy Duckworth and U.S. Rep. Brad Schneider of Deerfield sent the EPA a letter requesting a Sterigenics-level effort in Lake County. Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan later sent a similar letter to the federal agency.

This week, Schneider announced the introduction of legislation along with the state’s two senators and Democratic congressmen Dan Lipinski and Bill Foster that would require the U.S. EPA to revise ethylene oxide emissions standards for medical sterilization and chemical facilities.

The bill also requires the EPA to notify the public no more than 30 days after it learns that the new standards have been violated.


“The EPA needs to take all appropriate and necessary actions to protect our communities from the threat of ethylene oxide — a known carcinogen,” Schneider said in a statement. “Our bill would give the EPA 180 days to update its ethylene oxide emission standards based on the science because we cannot delay when it comes to the health of our families.”

Earlier this month, state Sen. Melinda Bush, a Grayslake Democrat, demanded answers about the deadly impact of ethylene oxide emissions from two Lake County plants during a Senate Environment and Conservation committee where victims and experts spoke about potential effects of ethylene oxide being emitted from Chicago-area plants.

“Public safety has to be the top priority,” Bush said in a Nov. 14 statement. “Today’s hearing made it clear that business interests are being prioritized over the health and safety of Illinoisans. And that’s not acceptable.”

Lake County Board Member Steve Carlson, who sits on the county’s board of health as a liaison, said Thursday’s presentation was eye-opening, and he understands why people are concerned.

“It’s absolutely something that needs to be looked into,” he said Friday. “Are the regulations stringent enough? That’s open to discussion, and that’s fine.


“As soon as we found out we jumped on it,” he added. “I’m happy with the efforts being made.”

Pfister told the board the county will be working with key governmental officials to encourage the U.S. EPA and IEPA to complete a thorough assessment of the Lake County facilities, and local officials will collaborate with state legislators to mandate all emissions reporting for facilities in Illinois and to have local health agencies notified when violations or health hazards occur at permitted facilities.

Both Medline and Vantage issued statements following the initial reports about the Lake County emissions vowing to cooperate with authorities.

“We abide by all federal standards as we serve health care providers,” Lara Simmons, president of the company’s quality division, said in an email to the Tribune.

“We take this matter very seriously,” Drew Richardson, Vantage’s site leader, said in a statement. “Not only because we have been a long-standing corporate resident of Gurnee, but because many of us also call this community our home for ourselves and our families.”