Libertyville sets in motion $2.7 million upgrade of wastewater treatment plant
By RICK KAMBIC
PIONEER PRESS |
JAN 31, 2019 AT 10:05 AM

Libertyville is accepting bids for an estimated $2.7 million expansion of its wastewater treatment plant, as part of an effort to comply with phosphorus removal requirements.

Village officials released a request for construction bids in late January shortly after trustees hired a construction engineer for more than $131,000. The village will be accepting bids through late March.



The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in 2011 began enforcing a limit on phosphorus in discharged water.

Communities connected to the Des Plaines Watershed, such as Libertyville and Mundelein, were notified of the new regulation in 2015, as part of their regular permit renewal, according an Illinois EPA spokeswoman.


Phosphorus is a natural water nutrient that stimulates growth and is commonly found in fertilizers and other industrial products, according to the EPA's website. But too much of it can create toxic levels for humans and can overpopulate algae that destabilizes waterway ecosystems.


The new EPA limit is one milligram or less of phosphorus per liter of released water. Libertyville’s most recent monthly average was four milligrams per liter, according to a Jan. 22 memo from the public works department.




“It’s good for the health of our residents, but it’s also expensive and it’s another unfunded mandate from the State of Illinois,” Mayor Terry Weppler said.

Libertyville will cover the $2.7 million construction project with money from the Illinois EPA’s Water Pollution Control Revolving Loan Program, according to the public works department. The loan comes with a 1.76 percent interest rate.

“The state is the one that’s requiring us to do all this work, so we’re going to take advantage of what we can,” Weppler said of Libertyville’s eligibility for the state loan.

Libertyville’s permit was supposed to expire in April, but the Illinois EPA granted the village an one-year extension while officials in Libertyville and Mundelein explored whether to consolidate their neighboring plants.

The two treatment plants, which are located along Milwaukee Avenue, collect and treat commercial and household waste, as well as ground water that enters through cracked pipes or old joint storm water connections, before releasing the treated water into the Des Plaines River.

Community leaders from both towns ultimately decided to move forward separately after the consolidation study revealed that a possible merger would cost $6 million more than the price of Libertyville’s upgrade.

The forthcoming expansion to Libertyville’s plant includes a new building for chemical treatment of phosphorus, as well as new pumps and piping to move the water.

Weppler said the project should be completed by April 2020 and without any noticeable disruptions to residents and businesses.