Former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler confirmed to lead the Environmental Protection Agency
BY BRADY DENNIS AND JULIET EILPERIN
WASHINGTON POST |
FEB 28, 2019 AT 4:26 PM


(Jabin Botsford / The Washington Post)
WASHINGTON — The Senate on Thursday approved former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler to head the Environmental Protection Agency by a vote of 52 to 47, elevating a veteran of Washington political and industry circles who has advanced President Donald Trump's push to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations.

Wheeler, who began his career at the EPA during the 1990s and spent years on Capitol Hill before heading to the private sector, has elicited praise from Republicans for his deregulatory agenda and criticism from Democrats for his refusal to take action on climate change and several public health priorities. He has been running the agency since Trump's first administrator, Scott Pruitt, stepped down in July amid scandals surrounding his management and spending practices. Trump said in November that he intended to nominate Wheeler for the top job, saying he had done a "fantastic job" in his interim role.



At his confirmation hearing in January, Wheeler highlighted dozens of significant rules that the EPA has begun to roll back in the past two years, and he made clear to lawmakers that he intended to continue the Trump administration's reversal of environmental regulations.

"Through our deregulatory actions, the Trump administration has proven that burdensome federal regulations are not necessary to drive environmental progress," Wheeler said at the time. "Certainty, and the innovation that thrives in a climate of certainty, are key to progress."


Despite the litany of rollbacks, the EPA under Wheeler also has began initiatives aimed at reducing lead exposure around the country and providing oversight for a class of unregulated, long-lasting chemicals known as perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl compounds, or PFAS, that pose serious health risks to millions of Americans. But the agency has yet to take definitive regulatory action on those proposals.

One Republican, Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, voted against Wheeler's confirmation Thursday on the grounds that he had worked to water down federal rules curbing greenhouse gas pollution from power plants and to weaken fuel standards for the nation's cars and pickup trucks.


"I believe that Mr. Wheeler, unlike Scott Pruitt, understands the mission of the EPA and acts in accordance with ethical standards; however, the policies he has supported as Acting Administrator are not in the best interest of our environment and public health, particularly given the threat of climate change to our nation," Collins, who supported Wheeler's confirmation as deputy EPA administrator last year, said in a statement.

While Democrats initially viewed Wheeler as a pragmatic technocrat with whom they could forge a handful of policy compromises, they expressed disappointment over key decisions he has made at the agency.

Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, had voted to confirm Wheeler as EPA deputy administrator last year. But opposed Wheeler's confirmation this time, he said, in light of his push to freeze vehicle fuel efficiency standards and to revisit the cost-benefit analysis the agency used to impose limits on mercury pollution that power companies have already achieved.


"As Acting Administrator, he hasn't demonstrated a desire or a will to make any meaningful progress on clean drinking water standards and has rolled back clean air standards that are directly impacting West Virginians," Manchin said in a statement.

Democrats used the vote as an opportunity to call for greater action on climate change, with more than six senators speaking to a nearly empty chamber about why the federal government should press for steeper cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. "It ought to tell us a lot that the Republicans put up a coal lobbyist to represent the people of America, leading the Environmental Protection Agency," said Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I.

The world has warmed more than 1 degree Celsius since pre-industrial levels, and a United Nations report last fall concluded that humans need to cut their carbon emissions nearly in half over the coming decade to stave off the most catastrophic impacts of climate change. So far, that appears unlikely, as many nations aren't hitting the emissions targets they set as part of the 2015 Paris climate accord. Global emissions also rose in 2018.

But most Republicans, including Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Chairman John Barrasso of Wyoming, said Wheeler had eased the burden on industry without undermining key environmental protections. Barrasso pointed to the EPA's push to scale back limits on carbon dioxide emissions from power plants and the federal government's jurisdiction over water bodies in the United States.

"During the last administration, the EPA issued punishing regulations that would hurt the economy and raise costs on families," Barrasso said. "Under acting Administrator Wheeler's leadership, the EPA has taken a different approach."

Industry officials credited Wheeler as helping spur the economy by restraining what they view as federal overreach.

"Regulatory certainty has been key to the historic manufacturing job growth we've seen under the current administration, and that would not have been possible without Andrew's leadership at EPA," Jay Timmons, president and CEO of the National Association of Manufacturers said in an statement.


And Karen Harbert, president and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's Global Energy Institute, said Wheeler's "extensive experience" had prepared him to serve as the nation's top environmental official.


"Unlike with some nominees, we do not have to speculate about what Mr. Wheeler will do in office," Gore said. "From his actions as acting administrator for the past eight months, we have clear evidence of his agenda: undermine rules to limit toxic mercury, allow more smog and water pollution, and roll back protections against the threat of climate change. The senators who voted to entrust Mr. Wheeler with our environment know exactly what he will do with that power."