Gurnee Village Board told state legislation could change regulations on ethylene oxide emissions
By JIM NEWTON
NEWS-SUN |
JAN 29, 2019 AT 3:15 PM

Gurnee trustees were told Monday that a bill in the Illinois General Assembly could tighten regulations for ethylene oxide emissions, which have been the subject of scrutiny after reports about emissions from two manufacturing plants in Gurnee and Waukegan.

State Sen. Melinda Bush, D-Grayslake, chair of the Senate Environmental Committee, told the Gurnee Village Board that the bill could include changing the measurements of such emissions from being percentage-based to tonnage-based.


Bush added that measure alone would restrict larger plants from being allowed to release more of the chemicals than smaller plants.

“We are definitely talking about legislation that will limit pounds of emissions being put out,” Bush told the board.


But Bush added there is still a lot to learn and do, saying there are some “promising” alternatives being studied, but in the meantime, there is still a need to use ethylene oxide to sterilize surgical equipment.


“My biggest priority now, I promise you, is public health. But there are other concerns,” Bush said. “One of which is that, as of today, there isn’t a replacement for EtO (ethylene oxide) to sterilize these items.”



Controversy arose following reports last year that two Lake County businesses, Medline Industries in Waukegan and Vantage Specialty Chemicals in Gurnee, emit ethylene oxide, which is considered a cancer-causing substance.

In addition to legislative measures being studied at the state and federal level, local governments and agencies are also becoming involved, meeting with residents as well as state and federal Environmental Protection Agency officials.

Some residents, including a group called Stop EtO in Lake County, are pushing for more information and action.

Following meetings with local officials, the U.S. EPA set up an informational website for local residents that monitors the emissions tests and releases results. The site is located at www.epa.gov/il/addressing-ethylene-oxide-emissions-lake-county-illinois.


Also speaking at the Village Board Monday was Larry Mackey, a deputy director of health services with the Lake County Health Department.

Mackey said officials at all level of government have been meeting on the issue, including a recent meeting in Chicago with local officials and state officials teleconferencing with the EPA in Washington.

Mackey reiterated that both Vantage and Medline have agreed to voluntarily submit to additional studies that will be handled by certified experts.

Both companies also agreed to install more emission-control equipment at their plants to reduce EtO output, Mackey said, and that project could be completed by this spring, weather permitting.

When trustee Thomas Hood asked Mackey what the public can do to become involved, Mackey said residents in areas of concern are encouraged to study the issue, ask questions and monitor information from EPA and local officials.


“We should all work together as a team to influence as much as we can, where we can,” Mackey said. “We all have the same interests at heart.”

Mayor Krysti Kovarik said there has been talk of forming a local committee including municipal representatives in the vicinity of the plants.

The committee could also include representatives of the EPA, the Health Department and state legislators. Kovarik said she supports the idea, and that such an environmental committee could become a standing entity to address environmental concerns beyond the EtO issue in the future.

Village Attorney Bryan Winter said clearly the main authority and regulation over such emissions rests with the federal EPA, followed by the state EPA. Despite some comments from residents, Winter said home rule status does not give villages the authority to “exceed beyond state and federal control” or supersede federal or state health standards.

Residents at Village Board meetings in the past two months have said the Illinois EPA and the U.S. EPA are not reacting with urgency to reports about the potential dangers of ethylene oxide and the location of manufacturers who use the sterilizing agent, and local officials need to do more.

Kovarik has said village and local health officials have been involved in a whirlwind of activities, including meetings with the EPA at all levels since questions have been raised about the emissions, and will continue to be involved.