Chicago’s plan to replace city’s lead water pipes expected in coming weeks, official says
By GREGORY PRATT
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
AUG 19, 2020 AT 8:17 PM

Mayor Lori Lightfoot will unveil a plan to replace Chicago’s lead water pipes sometime in the coming weeks, top administration officials said, though key details about the plan remain in doubt.

Lightfoot water Commissioner Randy Conner and Budget Director Susie Park told aldermen about the plan at a City Council committee meeting on Tuesday.


The plan will be voluntary, but other key details aren’t yet known.

Chicago politicians including Lightfoot have long struggled with the issue. Lead pipes have been linked to health issues and violence spikes, but a full-on replacement would cost billions the city can’t afford. In the meantime, Lightfoot and other politicians have been careful to say the city’s water is safe to drink.

Eargos are the hearing aid no one will know you're wearing. But they're so sleek, you just might be tempted to show them off...

At an unrelated news conference on Wednesday, Lightfoot essentially reiterated the points made by administration officials while acknowledging the city hasn’t figured out financing for the project. But, she added, “The time of reckoning is now.”



Chicago has the most lead service lines in the United States, largely because the city’s plumbing code required the use of lead to connect single-family homes and two-flats to street mains until Congress banned the practice in 1986.



City officials have known for decades that lead service lines are a public health hazard. They largely avoided scrutiny over the years by adding chemicals to the municipal water supply that form a protective coating inside lead pipes connecting homes to cast-iron street mains.

In 2013, experts from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency published a study of Chicago homes detailing how that protective coating can break down if water hasn’t been used for several hours, allowing bits of lead or microscopic particles of the toxic metal to leach into tap water.

The researchers also found that lead levels in tap water could spike for months — or even years — if service lines had been disturbed by street work or plumbing repairs, including the installation of water meters.

Other cities have launched programs that split the cost of replacing the pipes with property owners, often on a sliding scale intended to ease the burden on low-income residents.