Highest levels of cancer-causing gas found in communities near Sterigenics since U.S. EPA began testing
By MICHAEL HAWTHORNE
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
MAR 08, 2019 AT 7:30 PM

During the month before Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s administration shuttered Sterigenics in Willowbrook, air monitors recorded the highest levels of ethylene oxide in nearby residential neighborhoods since federal inspectors began testing for the cancer-causing gas, according to documents released Thursday.

Charts and slides posted online by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency show average daily concentrations of the chemical varied widely on the eight days sampled between Jan. 22 and Feb. 11. Similar to earlier results, high levels were detected when prevailing winds blew from Sterigenics toward a specific monitor, while the amounts measured upwind of the facility during the same day were significantly lower, the slides show.



Answering questions from residents during an online seminar, a top EPA official said what stood out for him were the highest concentrations detected to date in residential areas and at Hinsdale South High School. But the agency again stopped short of making any conclusions about its findings, promising more answers during the spring after completing a more detailed evaluation of cancer risks in Willowbrook and surrounding suburbs.

“We continue to believe the facility is responsible for a significant amount of ethylene oxide in the area,” Mike Koerber, associate director for policy at the EPA’s Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, said during the seminar.


One of the days Koerber highlighted was Jan. 22, when a moderate breeze from the south blew toward monitors at a Willowbrook water tower a half-mile north of Sterigenics and Willow Pond Park, just over a mile north of two buildings where the company uses ethylene oxide to sterilize medical equipment, pharmaceutical drugs, spices and food.

Concentrations that day averaged 10.8 micrograms of ethylene oxide per cubic meter of air at the water tower and 2.21 at the park.



To put those numbers in perspective, residential exposure to 2.1 micrograms of ethylene oxide per cubic meter of air over 33 years could trigger more than six cases of cancer for every 1,000 people exposed, according to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, an arm of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The EPA generally investigates pollutants when local cancer risks are greater than 100 in a million, or 0.1 in 1,000.

On Jan. 27, when winds blew mostly from the southeast, an EPA monitor at Willowbrook Village Hall — across the street from Sterigenics — recorded a daily average of 19.3 micrograms per cubic meter. About two-thirds of a mile to the northwest, the reading at Hinsdale South’s monitor was 3.29 — the highest to date at the high school.

Oak Brook-based Sterigenics has told the community that less than 1/10 of 1 percent of the ethylene oxide used at its facility is released into the atmosphere, and that the company complies with its EPA permit. The company also has said new pollution-control equipment it voluntarily installed last summer further reduced its emissions.

Responding to the new January testing results, the company called the “variability of concentrations … both inexplicable and inconsistent.”

“Sterigenics is confident that its operations adhered to the stringent standards that are required,” the company said in a statement. “The company has found no evidence to suggest that its Willowbrook facility is responsible for the inconsistency and variability in the monitoring results.”

Lewis Weinstock, an EPA official overseeing the agency’s testing in Willowbrook, said there is a relatively simple explanation for the variability. “Where the wind blows is where the ethylene oxide goes,” he said during the online seminar.

The Stop Sterigenics community group said it believes the latest results prove the company’s pollution controls have failed to eliminate alarmingly high cancer risks in the area.

“We demand that the U.S. EPA and Illinois EPA immediately act to permanently shut down Sterigenics,” the group said in a statement. “We have been poisoned long enough.”

U.S. Sens. Dick Durbin and Tammy Duckworth released their own joint statement on Friday.

“This alarming data further confirms that the people of Willowbrook and the surrounding community have been exposed to unacceptable levels of cancer-causing ethylene oxide (EtO) emissions from Sterigenics,” the Illinois Democrats said. “The EPA must use its authority to immediately publish a new safety standard that reflects the fact that EtO is a known carcinogen and conduct a study on the background levels of EtO across the nation. We know EtO is dangerous to public health and we cannot afford any more delays.”

The Chicago Tribune has reported that federal and state officials began taking a closer look at Sterigenics in late 2017 after determining that cancer risks in one census tract near the Willowbrook facility are more than nine times higher than the national average, based on the company’s legally allowed pollution in 2014. About 19,000 people in southeast DuPage County live within a mile of the facility, located in a cluster of low-rise government and commercial buildings behind a Target store near Illinois Route 83 and the Stevenson Expressway.

Amid a public outcry, Pritzker directed the Illinois EPA on Feb. 15 to block Sterigenics from using ethylene oxide, basing the action on state laws intended to protect Illinoisans from harmful pollution.


In court documents filed since the state shut down the facility, Illinois Attorney General Kwame Raoul’s office alleges the company “does not operate in full compliance with its operating permit.”

Documents filed by Raoul’s office also assert that the Illinois EPA had found “there was no significant source of ethylene oxide, other than Sterigenics, that could be contributing to higher ethylene oxide concentrations.”

The company suggested Thursday there were other sources of the gas, or some other “interfering factor” affecting the test results.

Federal officials have continued to collect air samples since the facility shut down. On Thursday, the EPA revealed that the company began its own testing at the beginning of February, but neither the agency nor Sterigenics have shared the results.

Sterigenics, which is owned in part by a private equity fund co-founded by former Gov. Bruce Rauner, is urging U.S. District Judge Ruben Castillo to overturn the state’s order.

“Sterigenics’ well-deserved reputation as a reliable, safe and innovative company, along with its customer relationships, will be irreparably damaged by even a brief shutdown,” the company’s lawyers wrote in a March 1 court filing. “While the Willowbrook facility is shut down, Sterigenics faces financial loss, reputational harm and the loss of benefit of using its own licensed and permitted facility.”

In public statements, Sterigenics also has warned the state’s action “will place the health and lives of thousands of patients who rely on the critical medical products sterilized at Willowbrook at risk.”

The Food and Drug Administration, which regulates medical devices, said it is “not aware of any imminent device shortages as a result of the closure of the Willowbrook facility.” A spokeswoman said the FDA is monitoring the situation closely.


Citing case law and the 11th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, Raoul’s office contends the dispute belongs in state court in DuPage County rather than federal court in Chicago.

The state’s legal action is grounded in part on a provision in the 1970 Clean Air Act that enables environmental regulators to respond quickly to air pollution emergencies. The same authority can be invoked to address cancer-causing pollution, "the harm from which might take many years to manifest itself,” according to a U.S. EPA guidance memo.

Ethylene oxide has been on the federal list of carcinogens since 1985. In December 2016, the U.S. EPA released a long-delayed reassessment that officially added the agency to a list of other national and international organizations declaring the chemical poses significant long-term cancer risks, in particular for breast cancer, leukemia and lymphomas.