Activists, politicians call on EPA to drop Trump plan to relax emissions standards for coal-fired power plants
By TONY BRISCOE
CHICAGO TRIBUNE |
OCT 01, 2018 AT 3:40 PM


Environmental and health advocates from across the country flocked to Chicago on Monday to speak out at the only public meeting on the Trump administration’s coal-friendly energy proposal.

Groups gathered throughout the morning at the Metcalfe Federal Building to call on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to abandon President Donald Trump’s Affordable Clean Energy proposal, which would relax emissions standards for coal-fired power plants.


A half-hour into the hearing, about two dozen activists wearing shirts reading “Stop killing us” assembled in the front of the meeting room and began shouting, “When people and climate are under attack, what do we do? Stand up! Fight back!”

EPA officials leading the meeting stepped into the hallway before calling for a 10-minute recess. Shortly after, two federal law enforcement officers warned protesters to leave and the demonstration dispersed. Later, more than 100 protesters went to Federal Plaza to rally.


The Trump administration proposal was largely viewed by environmentalists as another attempt to prop up the withering coal industry, which is being supplanted by natural gas, a cheaper alternative that also emits less carbon dioxide. It also roused concerns as many cited an EPA analysis that acknowledged the pollutants given off from the Affordable Clean Energy rule could lead to as many as 1,400 premature deaths per year by 2030 and 15,000 cases of upper-respiratory problems.

“The EPA is taking an existing rule that doesn’t do enough and making it worse,” said Brian Urbaszewski, director of environmental health at the Respiratory Health Association of Metropolitan Chicago. “You are actively encouraging filthy coal plants to pollute years or even decades more into the future. You have proposed a system that would allow them to avoid cleanup requirements, run more often and massively increase the pollution they can put out every year. You are choosing to let more people get sick and die.



“This is not a rule to protect human health,” he added. “This is something an enemy of this country would call a successful attack.”


Under the rewrite of President Barack Obama’s Clean Power Plan, states would be permitted to adopt their own regulations and could exempt certain coal plants from doing anything to reduce pollution. It is one of several attempts by the Trump administration and the Republican-controlled Congress to bolster the coal industry and roll back clean air and water regulations enacted during Obama’s tenure.

In addition to environmental advocates, several Democratic public officials from across the country traveled to Chicago to testify against the Trump plan, warning about the impact of climate change and air pollution, including Gavin McCabe of the New York state attorney general’s office and Washington Gov. Jay Inslee.

“This plan isn’t only irresponsible, this is dangerous,” Inslee said. “... We need to be more like the American eagle and not the ostrich with its head in the sand.”

The effort to replace the Clean Power Plan is the latest attempt at deregulation by Trump, who also pledged to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate agreement, a global pact intended to reduce carbon emissions.


Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan talked about violent tornadoes in 2015, cold deaths during polar vortex winters and devastating flooding in towns such as Cairo, Ill., as examples of weather extremes intensified by climate change.

“We are at a critical time in the environment for our planet. Meaningful action is needed to slow the undeniable impacts that man-made emissions of greenhouse gases are having on this Earth,” Madigan said. “Seventeen of the 18 warmest years recorded all have occurred since 2000. Our planet is frying. And (this) proposal does nothing to stop it.”

Later, at the Federal Plaza rally, Madigan said she would file a legal challenge if the EPA signs off on the rule.

Ahead of Monday’s hearing, Sen. Tammy Duckworth, D-Ill., also rebuked the energy plan.

“Internationally, this proposal will leave the United States further behind our allies who are taking aggressive action on climate change,” Duckworth said in a statement Sunday. “Now is not the time to be moving backwards. Our Nation should be focused on building a clean energy economy that promotes the development of technologies that reduce pollution and preserve our environment for generations.”

The share of power generation from coal has dropped from 52 percent in 1990 to 30 percent in 2017, and it continues to decline, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Natural gas, which is cheaper and emits about half as much carbon dioxide as coal, has taken off, surpassing coal as the top fuel for electricity generation in 2015.



But for some, the Trump plan means the creation of good-paying jobs.

Republican state Sen. Dale Fowler said 43 percent of Illinois’ coal miners live in his downstate district.

“This break away from red tape will jump-start a new coal revolution in Illinois,” Fowler said. “The coal-fired electric plants in the U.S. and Illinois will be back on a level playing field with other subsidized energy sources.”

Carbon emissions under the Trump plan are still expected to fall, but at a much slower rate than under the Clean Power Plan. While some states, Illinois included, are on pace to curtail their carbon emissions even more than under the Obama-era guidelines, it’s unclear whether this might derail states that are set to meet these standards or are lagging behind.

Monday’s meeting was the only public hearing, but the EPA will accept written comments through Oct. 31.
