Why a Water Main Break Flooded the Subway

By Corey Kilgannon
Jan. 14, 2020

It’s Tuesday.


Weather: Mostly cloudy, with a high in the mid-40s and a chance of rain in the late afternoon.  

New York City’s drinking water system erupted into the streets yesterday, disrupting the morning rush by flooding subway lines and a swath of the Upper West Side around Lincoln Center.

The flood snarled traffic and caused bus detours.

But the water main break also spotlighted the chronic problem lurking below the city’s streets: the labyrinth of water mains — some of which are more than a century old and prone to leaks and cracks — train tunnels and other old equipment that make up one of the world’s largest networks of subterranean infrastructure.

When the flood came
The break occurred around 62nd Street and Broadway just before 5 a.m., halting subway service along a stretch of the No. 1, 2 and 3 lines in Manhattan. It also created floodwaters up to a foot deep along parts of Broadway and Columbus Avenue, from West 61st Street into West 65th Street.

A lake of brown water lapped at the steps of Lincoln Center, and more than a half-million gallons flooded nearby subway tracks up to the rails.

Flooded streets mean problems underneath them
To understand how the break could affect the subway, one must realize that water mains and train tunnels share space underground with a sprawling tangle of sewer mains, power cables, gas and steam lines and telecom wires.

Because that equipment has been added piecemeal over the decades, even the basic task of locating and accessing utilities can be complicated. There is no official map of the underground.

Ted Timbers, a spokesman for the Department of Environmental Protection, said it took crews two hours to turn off the leak, mostly because of the difficulty locating the broken main among the several water mains lying among a morass of other utility lines.

New York City has about 6,800 miles of water mains that carry more than a billion gallons of water a day to residents and businesses. In the past five fiscal years, the city recorded an average of 474 breaks a year, according to the Mayor’s Management Report, which assesses city services.

Winter adds to the problems
Winter poses especially difficult conditions for water mains and other utilities because the cold can make older cast-iron mains brittle, and because extreme temperature swings can create “freeze-thaw” cycles that cause the ground around the water mains to expand and contract, putting external pressure on the pipes.

Frigid temperatures last week suddenly shifted to unseasonably warm weather in the 60s over the weekend, only to dip back toward the 30s yesterday, when the break occurred.

This phenomenon has worsened in recent years because of more severe temperature swings, which many researchers have linked to climate change.

“It used to be that it would get cold and it would stay cold in the winter, and you’d just have the early winter and late winter weather fluctuations,” Mr. Timbers said.

The city has replaced an average of 46 miles of water mains each year over the past decade, he said.

Upgrading the below-street utilities is a painstaking process. The city has $1.4 billion budgeted over the next five years for upgrades and replacements, including new pipes made of a more durable, graphite-rich cast iron known as ductile iron.