Raw Sewage Flooded Their Homes. They Finally Know Why.

The city has admitted that a collapsed pipe, not kitchen grease, caused the accident that affected more than 100 homeowners in Queens.


Karim McKenzie and his family are still living in a hotel after a sewage backup caused extensive damage to his home.

By Katie Van Syckle
Dec. 19, 2019

Two days after Thanksgiving, Ricardo McKenzie smelled a strange odor in his house in the middle of the night.

By noon, his brother Karim, 33, who lived in the basement apartment of the home in Queens, watched, stunned, as raw sewage gushed out of his toilet and bathtub like a fountain. Ricardo McKenzie, 39, said he called 911 repeatedly while his family tried to remove the waste water with sump pumps.

“Seeing your items just float in sewage,” Karim said, “was just utter shock.”

Officials initially suggested that grease being poured down a sink was a possible cause of the Nov. 30 accident that affected 127 homes in South Jamaica. Residents felt they were being blamed.

But after an investigation, the city’s Department of Environmental Protection has determined that the flooding was caused by a collapsed pipe, according to a report obtained by The New York Times that has not been released publicly — leaving the city liable for damage claims that could reach millions of dollars.

“D.E.P. accepts responsibility,” the report reads.

“These types of events are extremely rare,” Vincent Sapienza, the D.E.P.’s commissioner, said. “We at the D.E.P. do a good job at regular maintenance. We’ve got 7,500 miles of sewers, 95 pumping stations, 14 plants, and we do a good job keeping the water moving through the pipes. But, you know, once every five years or so, something like this occurs.”

Officials have determined it is not possible to repair the collapsed pipe, and they are now building a new segment of sewer around it, at a cost of about $9 million.


For residents, the D.E.P.’s findings confirm what they already believed: They didn’t cause the flooding. But it’s only a moral victory: Nearly 160 residents remain displaced, with little sense of when they’ll be able to return to their homes.

“You just want to be made whole again,” Ricardo McKenzie said.

More than two weeks after the flooding, the McKenzies are still living in a hotel. D.E.P. trucks are a common sight on their street, and the odor of sour sewage still floats through the neighborhood. Mr. McKenzie’s 4-year-old son, Kenneth, has been living with his wife’s family in Brooklyn, and he frequently asks to return home to his parents.

But their house still doesn’t have heat, and the basement still smells like raw sewage. Mr. McKenzie said his insurance company told him they will not cover the damage. Basic homeowner and tenant’s insurance in New York State does not cover sewer backups.

Many area residents tell a similar story. The 160 residents living in hotel rooms that the Red Cross provided could be there through early January.

The pipe that collapsed and produced the blockage was built in 1987 by the New York State Department of Transportation. It was 42 inches in diameter and located deep beneath a bridge abutment and entry ramp for the 150th Street overpass, which spans South Conduit Avenue and the Belt Parkway.


The pipe’s unique location made it difficult for the city to access the area and quickly address the flooding, Mr. Sapienza said. The subsequent investigation has also been complicated by the locale.

“The only thing we do know,” Mr. Sapienza said, “is sewer pipes made of reinforced concrete are supposed to last much longer than 32 years.”

The city is overseeing the cleanup effort, sending in cleaners in hazmat suits, gutting basements and replacing boilers and hot water heaters. The city’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene is conducting air quality tests, and the comptroller’s office is helping people file claims. And the D.E.P. is currently pumping more than 10 million gallons of wastewater into sewers that are not affected by the blockage.

Many families have not been reimbursed yet for any expenses they have incurred, because legally the city requires them to file a claim first.

Those expenses, for most residents, are running to tens of thousands of dollars. Many people who have been forced out of their homes, or need to buy new beds, refrigerators and winter clothes, must pay out of pocket or wait until the city approves their claims.

Supreet Singh, 36, who lives with her husband and 2-year-old daughter, said her family had to put about $5,000 on credit cards to cover cleanup equipment before the city provided assistance. They have not been reimbursed.

“It’s not like we have the cash to go out and buy stuff, which is what angers a lot of people,” Ms. Singh said. “Every one of us is working hard.”

Scott Stringer, the city’s comptroller, said his office is committed to reviewing claims quickly. The comptroller’s office is also allowing people who have suffered damages to submit an estimate, which expedites the process.

“We want residents to know that we’re going to do everything in our power to help them,” Mr. Stringer said.

Yvette Taylor, 53, lives in one of the affected homes with her adult cousin and mother, who is 81. She is concerned the home is not safe for her family, especially her mother.


Officials from the health department said the main concern is direct exposure to untreated sewage, which can cause gastrointestinal illness, including nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. The air quality tests have shown normal results, according to the health department, and no related illnesses have been reported. Officials said they will inspect each home.

Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University, said the risk of getting sick is low. “We can take a little refuge in the data and the data show that in a circumstance like this, even though it is as my son would say, ‘gross,’ actually the consequent illness is pretty darn unusual,” he said.

Smaller backups, where clogging causes sewage to flow back up and into low-lying municipal pipes, are a common occurrence in New York City. The majority of these incidents occur in Queens, according to the 2019 State of the Sewers report issued annually by the D.E.P.

In February, the City Council passed a law requiring the city to prepare a better plan to prevent sewer-system backups. The legislation also says the city must inspect and clean any backups within 10 days.

Councilman Costa G. Constantinides, from Queens, who sponsored the legislation, said he hoped the bill would be a way to determine what was causing the backups.

“What I’ve heard consistently has been this talk about grease, and it’s much more complicated than just that,” he said.

In 2018, 66 percent of backups in New York City, and specifically 80 percent in Queens, were grease-related, one reason for the D.E.P.’s initial diagnosis for the Nov. 30 flooding.

In this case, Mr. Sapienza said, “The pipe just catastrophically failed. It’s very rare, extraordinarily rare.”


The D.E.P. last inspected this section of pipe in May 2018, using a camera on a small boat pulled from one end to the other, and did not find any issues, according to Mr. Sapienza.

Since 2015, the city has invested $1.9 billion to build a comprehensive drainage system that would help to address flooding and infrastructure in southeast Queens, according to Julia Arredondo, a spokeswoman for the mayor’s office.

“My heart goes out to the homeowners in Queens who were affected by the sewage blockage. It was a terrible end to such a joyous holiday weekend,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement. “We will continue to assist in any way we can to ensure residents are taken care of.”

Karim McKenzie said he never believed grease caused the incident.

“Since I was young, my mom, when she threw out grease, she would always put it in little milk cartons and throw it out. A lot of people know not to throw grease in the toilet or the sink,” he said.

Many of his neighbors have said they were offended by the implication that residents would dispose of cooking grease improperly.

But at this point, Karim just wants to go home.

“You still have to fix people’s homes,” he said. “Let’s figure out how we’re going to fix people’s homes faster, sooner rather than later.”